Introduction
Non-cognitive skills and targeted interventions
Locus of Control
Hope
Target population
Coaching intervention
Timing of the interventions and surveys.
Data
Eect on psychological variables
Results
Eect of HW on annual income
Eect on psychological variables of the programs
The role of the coaching intervention
Concluding discussion
1.B Coaching plans and modules
Introduction
Model
Graduation Intervention
Simulations Analysis
ATE
Low initial assets
Conclusion
Chapter 3
Introduction
Dierences between female and male headed households
Adoption of farming practices
Conclusions
3.
Figure
Figure 1 . 2 :
Figure
Figure
Figure 2
Figure 2
Figure
Figure 2
Figures 2
Figure 3
Figure 3
Table 1
Table 1 .
Table 1 .
Table 2 .
Table 2 .
Table 2 .
Table 2
Table 2 .
Table 3 .
Table 3 .
Table 3 .
Table 3 .
Table 3 .
and surveys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.2 Village assignment to HW and randomization into the coaching intervention 1.3 Internality index at baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.4 Eect of HW on Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.5 Eect of HW on Internality Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.6 Eect of HW on Powerful others Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.2.1 Joint distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.4.1 Quantile treatment eects on assets, period 10. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.4.2 Quantile treatment eects on production, period 10. . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.A.1Density covariate shock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.2.1 CDFs for initial (pre-treatment) psychological variables, male and female household heads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.3.1 CDFs for nal psychological variables, before and after intervention, female household heads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.2 Baseline balance, coaching villages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.3 Eect of Haku Wiñay on midline Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.4 Eect of Haku Wiñay on midline Income, non-parametric . . . . . . . . of HW assignment on psychological variables, Household head . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.7 Regression discontinuity impact on psychological variables, by treatment group, Household head . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.8 Average impact of coaching on psychological variables, Household head, HW participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.9 Regression discontinuity impact on whether small animals spend their night in a pen, by treatment group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.A.1Locus of control questionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.A.2Hope questionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.B.1Types of goals set by coaching participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.B.2Coaching sessions, part 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.B.3Coaching sessions, part 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.C.1Attrition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.4.1 Treatment eect in period 10, early shocks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.5.1 Treatment eect in period 10, no shocks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.5.2 Heterogeneity in initial psycho asset, period 10, no shocks . . . . . . . . . 2.5.3 Heterogeneity in initial assets, period 10, no shocks . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.5.4 Total eect per group and percentage that can be attributed to the program. 3.2.1 Distribution of males and females across study sample. . . . . . . . . . . 3.2.2 Baseline balance, male and female headed households . . . . . . . . . . . -v-3.3.1 Dierence between household head and HW participant, midline . . . . . 3.3.2 Average impact of HW and coaching on psychological variables, household heads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.4.1 Baseline practices, MHHs vs FHHs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.4.2 Adoption of farming practices, HW beneciaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . in low-income countries provide an integrated package of interventions to poor rural households. The program traditionally includes the transfer of a productive asset, training on agricultural technologies and/or business administration, and building beneciary self-condence and other psychological assets through soft-skills or coaching interventions. Multiple studies have found participants to benet substan-
my future career. I also want to express my deepest gratitude to Travis Lybbert and Steve Boucher for their support over the years and for providing invaluable feedback for the completion of this dissertation. I feel very fortunate to have had not only brilliant professors as members of my committee but also excellent persons. Thank you all. I would also like to thank Ursula Aldana and her team at IEP in Lima, Peru. This dissertation would not have been possible without her collaboration. Thank you to my friends for making my time in Davis an unforgettable one. Thank you to Cristina Chiarella, for helping me throughout this journey and for everyday motivating me to keep learning, moving, and questioning. It is a privilege to share my days with you. To my parents and brother for being supportive of this endeavor away from home for so many years, gracias. And last but not least, I want to acknowledge that the majority of this dissertation would not have been possible without the kindness of almost 1000 Peruvian families that opened their homes to our research team. I hope these pages reect my utmost respect for them. are aimed at giving a big push out of poverty to rural households on very vulnerable economic conditions. These programs are regarded as a success since short and even long term impacts have been observed on economic well-being indicators of participating households. One of the usual components of these programs is an explicit life skills coaching module. Anecdotal evidence points towards a very important role of this module on the success of the program. But to our knowledge, there is no clear evidence in the literature identifying the psychological mechanisms through which it operates. The Haku Wiñay program in Peru follows almost the classic formula of graduation interventions, except for the life skills coaching. This provides a unique opportunity to
, Cobb-Clark and Schurer (2011) , Nowicki et al. (2018) ) both through time and as a cause of targeted interventions. Since most of this evidence comes from the global north, the knowledge about these concepts is scarce for non-WEIRD populations. Hence, it remains an open question to understand how these measurements behave in rural environments in the global south.
a three year program designed and implemented by the Ministry of Development and Social Inclusion (MIDIS in Spanish) of Peru that targets subsistence farmers whose household head is between the ages of 18 and 65. It started as a pilot in 2012 and it was expanded the next year to a governmental program as part of the governmental strategy of development and social inclusion policies called "Include to Grow" (MIDIS
Villages with at least 40 households.4. Villages where at least 60 % of the households have at least one NBI 7 (unmet basic need).
Figure 1.1: Timeline of interventions and surveys
Figure 1.2: Village assignment to HW and randomization into the coaching intervention
Figure 1.4: Eect of HW on Income
Figure 1.5: Eect of HW on Internality Index
Figure2.2.1a shows the joint initial distribution of perceived agency and physical assets.As an initial scenario, we assume zero correlation between the two 5 . Perceived agency 3 Ā is implicitly dened by the inequalityA γ h it -F > A γ l it
Figure 2.2.1b shows the initial joint distribution after eligible households receive the graduation transfer. The transfers were equal to 7 units of the physical asset and 0.06 of the psychological asset. The distribution shifts relative to Figure 2.2.1a and more mass is concentrated towards the north-east of the Micawber threshold, again represented by the dashed line. It is worth noting that the transfer does not push every eligible household beyond the Micawber threshold, implying that the transfers are simply not enough for those households that start o towards the origin of the plane. Hence, this group of households will converge to the low equilibrium, even in the absence of shocks. In the next section we analyze how the dynamics evolve and compare a group exposed to the transfer with a perfect counterfactual which did not take part of the graduation program.
Figure 2.4.1: Quantile treatment eects on assets, period 10. (a) Early shocks
Figure 2.4.2: Quantile treatment eects on production, period 10. (a) Early shocks
Figures 2.4.1b and 2.4.2b show the results for the QTE for assets and production. Both gures reveal that indeed, purging risk leads to positive signicant treatment eects at more quantiles. Figures 2.4.1a and 2.4.2a show there are signicant benets of the intervention only at quantiles larger than 0.4 and that these benets are larger than the ATE. Figures 2.4.1b and 2.4.2b reveal that at all the quantiles to the right of quantile 0.2
Figure 3.2.1: CDFs for initial (pre-treatment) psychological variables, male and female household heads (a) Internality (b) Chance
Figure 3.3.1: CDFs for nal psychological variables, before and after intervention, female household heads (a) Internality (b) Chance
This question translates to nding out whether people with better initial psychological levels are able to use the resources of the program better than those with lower levels, as measured by midline income. In order to investigate this question, we estimate the model presented in Equation 1.2 for dierent subgroups of households, based on whether their baseline level of internality, chance, powerful others and Hope3 are each above or below the median.
4: Eect of Haku Wiñay on midline Income, non-parametric is signicant at a 5% level. In comparison, the eect of assignment to treatment for those that have a baseline measure of internality below the median is only 630 Soles (USD 360 USD) and the eect is not statistically signicant. The dierence between the two coecients is signicant at a 10% level, conrming that households with higher initial levels of internality outperform those with lower ones. Panels B and C show the results for chance and powerful others. Households whose household head had baseline measures of these variables below the median (less external Locus of Control) appear to outperform those that have baseline measures above the median (more external Locus of Control), although most eects are not statistically signicant.The eect for below the median baseline powerful others Index is statistically signicant at a 5% level (close to 1800 Soles), and the dierence is signicant at a 10%. The bottom part of the table shows Panel D, where there appears to be no dierence in the eect on income of assignment to treatment for those above and below the median of the Hope3 index. Table 1.5: Income responses to heterogeneity in baseline psychological measures.First column reports the mean value of annual Income at midline below the cuto.Standard errors clustered at a village level in parenthesis. All models include xed eects per district. Included baseline controls are land size, household size, years of education of the household head, age of the household head, if the household head has ever used fertilizers of any kind, sex of household head and baseline annual income. Also, baseline levels for each of the other three psychological characteristics.
6: Regression discontinuity impact of HW assignment on psychological variables, Household head
4.1: Treatment eect in period 10, early shocks.
5.1: Treatment eect in period 10, no shocks.
5.2: Heterogeneity in initial psycho asset, period 10, no shocks
p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.
5.4: Total eect per group and percentage that can be attributed to the program.
2.1: Distribution of males and females across study sample.
3.1: Dierence between household head and HW participant, midline p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01 Table 3.3.2 below shows the OLS estimation results for the model presented in Equation
3.2: Average impact of HW and coaching on psychological variables, household headsStandard errors clustered at a village level in parenthesis. All models include xed eects per district.Included baseline controls are land size, household size, years of education of the household head, age of the household head, if the household head has ever used fertilizers of any kind, sex HW participant and baseline annual income. Also, baseline levels for each psychological variable. *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.
4.1: Baseline practices, MHHs vs FHHs p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01
4.2: Adoption of farming practices, HW beneciaries Outcome variable in rst two colums is whether the household prepared and used organic fertilizer in the past year. Outcome variable in columns 3 and 4 is whether the household has planted any vegetables in the past year. Outcome variable in columns 5 and 6 is whether the households transplant vegetable seedlings. Outcome in columns 7 and 8 is whether the households cultivates pastures. Standard errors clustered at a village level in parenthesis. All models include xed eects per district. Included baseline controls are land size, household size, years of education of the household head, age of the household head, if the household head has ever used fertilizers of any kind, sex of the hw participant or would-be participant and baseline annual income. Also, baseline levels for each psychological characteristic. *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.
tially from the program and positive eects have been shown to sustain for several years after the end of the program. Nevertheless, there are two pressing questions that are still to be answered regarding the functioning of the program. First, it is not clear why these programs work. Its multifaceted nature presents a challenge to understanding which are the necessary components for it to be cost-eective. Second, there is evidence that the program eects are highly heterogeneous, and some participants do not benet much from participating. Understanding the possible causes of the dierentiated eects is important to design better interventions. This dissertation is an attempt to contribute to the answering of these questions.
A central component of graduation programs is the life-skills coaching module. This is an expensive component that both program implementers and participants have claimed to play a central role in the success of these programs. Nevertheless, there have been few attempts to understand its role in the success of the intervention. In Chapter 1, I analyze how including a life-skills coaching module to Haku Wiñay, a program in Peru that had all of the other components of the graduation intervention but this one, aects a series of psychological variables. I nd evidence that the additional program increases the belief of having control over the outcomes of events that aect participant's lives. At the same time, the evaluation reveals that individuals with initial levels of psychological assets above the median increase their annual income as a consequence of the whole program.
-vii-
The two results of this chapter may indicate that income could be positively aected through an increase in locus of control. The next round of data collection will allow to test this hypothesis.
Chapter 2 stems from the results of Chapter 1 that reveal that participants that come into the program better psychologically equipped outperform those that start the program less equipped, and from the evidence from other studies highlighting the heterogeneity of impacts of graduation programs. In this chapter, with the aid of simulations generated by an innite horizon model parametrized to mimic a rural economy where households may be stuck in a low equilibrium, I characterize the importance of two possible sources of heterogeneity covariate shocks and initial psychological assets in the impacts of a graduation program that transfers both physical and psychological assets. This simulation analysis suggests that a possible avenue for having graduation programs that generate benets for a larger portion of the participants is by expanding pre-intervention activities to include an assessment of psychological well-being status. By doing this, the program may shift some of the psychological asset-building activities, such as the coaching component, from those that are well endowed towards those lacking these assets. At the same time, expanding the program towards insurance literacy and the oering of such products may be benecial. Additionally, some of the program funds destined to each household may go directly towards insurance in order reduce the possibility of falling to a low equilibrium, reducing the probabilities of beneting from the program in the face of a shock.
Lastly, Chapter 3 looks at whether the coaching program embedded in the Haku Wiñay intervention generates dierentiated eects for female-headed households compared to male-headed households when considering the psychological variables and a series of agricultural practices. This chapter is based on the same data from Chapter 1, and continues to explore possible sources of heterogeneous impacts. The chapter shows that female household heads have pre-treatment psychological variables that are lower compared to those of male household heads, which may make them more receptive to the coaching -viii-component in particular since the intervention was modestly ne-tuned to speak to the needs of women. I show that certain psychological variables for female household heads do increase relative to the male household heads, although the dierences are not statistically signicant. I additionally nd that female-headed households are more likely to grow vegetables, prepare and use organic fertilizer, and cultivate pastures as a consequence of participating in the coaching program relative to male-headed households, although the eect is only signicant for the rst variable, and marginally signicant for the second.
Nevertheless, given the small number of women that are household heads, the signicance tests for the eects on this subgroup are underpowered.
-ix-multiple commitments and for the time he dedicated to making this dissertation a reality.
His dedication and hard work is a source of inspiration and an example for conducting understand how the coaching module works by oering an ancillary coaching intervention to a subgroup of the Haku Wiñay participants of the 2017 cohort. Participants of the additional program are found to increase the value of an index measuring their internal locus of control the belief of having control over the outcomes of events that aect their 1 lives by a third of a standard deviation relative to non-participants while no signicant eect is found for a measure reecting hope. Haku Wiñay beneciaries with initial levels of locus of control above the median have an impact on annual income of the program that is more than three times larger than for those with initial levels below the median.
These results suggest that the ancillary coaching intervention may have the potential to positively aect economic well-being through an increase in locus of control.
Multifaceted graduation programs have been shown to be an eective approach to generate lasting improvements in the well-being of rural people in poverty (Banerjee et al. (2015) , Banerjee et al. (2016) , Bandiera et al. (2017) ). Although its components usually vary across contexts, the program traditionally includes the transfer of a productive asset, training on agricultural technologies and/or business administration, and building beneciary self-condence and other psychological assets through soft-skills or coaching interventions. While the reduced form impacts are impressive, and there is a theoretical case for strong complementarities between the transfer of tangible and psychological assets (Barrett et al. (2018) ), exactly how and why graduation programs work is incompletely understood. Reported heterogeneous responses to the intervention (Bandiera et al. 2017) add complexity to the understanding of the graduation programs, but it only makes it more critical to comprehend the mechanisms through which it operates in order to design programs that reach all ultra-poor households.
Peru's on-going Haku Wiñay
1 program, which provides all of the elements of the BRACbased graduation model except the psychological asset building, provides an important opportunity to quantify the relevance of the psychological attributes on the program's success by allowing to measure how much additional impact can an extra coaching and psychological asset building module add to a poverty reduction program. Program implementers have emphasized the importance of the coaching component in the positive results of the multifaceted intervention, arguing that it has been consistently considered by local implementers and by the participants themselves as probably the most crucial element for the success of Graduation-type programs (de Montesquiou et al. (2018)). The highlighting of this module as central for the success of the program points in the direction of the importance of having optimal psychological attributes. Nevertheless, beyond the anecdotal evidence, there hasn't been an analysis that quanties the relevance of the coaching component nor provides a clear picture of the mechanism through which it operates. 1 Haku Wiñay means "Let us Grow" in Quechua This paper aims at answering two main questions. First, we want to carefully identify the mechanisms that explain why these additional interventions work. For this goal, we seek to provide evidence to whether two key psychological concepts locus of control and hope are relevant to the success of graduation type interventions. Locus of control
is the degree to which people believe that they have control over the events that aect their lives internal locus of control , as opposed to external forces external locus of control (Rotter (1966) ). We dene hope as aspirational hope in the sense that it motivates action aimed at an aspiration (Lybbert and Wydick (2018b) ). There is mounting evidence that poverty undercuts both cognitive and non-cognitive skills (Mullainathan 2013 , Haushofer and Fehr 2014 , Wuepper and Lybbert 2017) . Both locus of control and hope fall into the latter category. Others have speculated that graduation programs work because they reverse these negative eects of poverty by raising subjective mental capacities (Duo (2012) ). We are not aware of previous eorts in the context of graduation programs to measure these psychological variables, and our goal is to not only implement the ancillary interventions that should reverse these negative consequences of poverty, but also to measure psychological attributes so that information can be used to design even more eective programs in the future. Second, we want to test whether higher initial levels of the two aforementioned variables generate increased impacts of the program on our main measure of economic well-being, which is annual income. There is increasing evidence of the relevance of these factors in economic decision-making (Abay et al. (2017) , Lybbert and Wydick (2018b) ), turning them into a source of potential heterogeneous responses to poverty alleviation interventions. If we are able to show that i) the ancillary program has a positive eect on the psychological variables and ii) income is higher for households with higher levels of locus of control and/or hope, there is indicative evidence for the mechanism through which coaching operates to increase income in graduation-type
interventions.
To answer these questions, we use the 2017 cohort of the Haku Wiñay (HW) program in Peru, that as described above, does not include a coaching module. We exploit the discontinuity in the eligibility criteria for villages to be considered for the HW program to identify the eect of the programs. Our sample initially consisted of 53 villages, 29 that satised the eligibility criteria and 24 that didn't and 999 households. Among the eligible villages for HW, we employ a partial population design where we randomize villages into being either not treated by the ancillary intervention or partially treated (ancillary intervention not oered to everyone in the village). This allows us to capture spillover eects from the ancillary treated households to non-treated households in the same village. We use a regression discontinuity approach to estimate the intention-totreat eects of the interventions on our post-treatment survey. This allows us to capture dierences between households only exposed to HW and those that were exposed to both HW and coaching (directly or indirectly). We further analyze the existence of heterogeneous eects of psychological variables on annual household income level using the same estimation strategy.
We nd that belonging to a HW eligible village increases income by around 1400 Soles (USD 800 in 2017 PPP). Moreover, we are able to show that households with an initial level of locus of control above the median as measured by the baseline, have on average an impact of HW on income of about 1200-1600 Soles (USD 700-900 USD in 2017 PPP) higher than those with initial locus of control levels below the median. For this subgroup with initial locus of control above the median, the impact of HW is more than 40% higher than the income of those that belong to the same subgroup but belong to villages not eligible for treatment. We are also able to show that the coaching intervention increases both the locus of control and hope measures, although the dierence for the latter with those that only receive the main intervention is not signicant. We also nd some evidence that coaching makes participants adopt agricultural practices that are readily available for them through the HW intervention.
These results provide indicative evidence favoring the hypothesis that coaching has the potential to have an eect on economic well-being through an increase in locus of control.
We are not able to verify this directly since the coaching intervention ended very close to the date of our second and most recent data collection. Nevertheless, the results are promising and provide robust evidence favoring the potential coaching has in magnifying the eects of a program like HW. In the second quarter of 2021 we expect to run a new survey that will allow us to conrm these ndings.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: section 2 will expand on the literature of non-cognitive skills and targeted interventions. Section 3 will explain carefully the psychological instruments that are being used and how are they measured. Section 4 presents the research design in detail, explaining the programs and data we collected. Section 5 shows the estimation strategy. Section 6 presents the results. Section 7 concludes.
Locus of control, hope, and non-cognitive skills in general have been studied in a variety of economic analysis for the last 20 years. An important percentage of the research centers on these measurements as explanatory variables, seeking to explain schooling choices (Heckman et al. 2006; Coleman and DeLeire 2003) , labor markets outcomes (Heineck and Anger (2010) ; Caliendo et al. (2015)), savings decisions (Cobb-Clark et al. 2016), among other outcomes. Most of this literature focuses on developed countries where these types of questionnaires have been used and validated more extensively. More recently, the literature has started to use these measures, locus of control in particular, in developing contexts to measure technology adoption (Malacarne 2019; Abay et al. 2017; Wuepper et al. 2020 ) and savings behaviors (Abay et al. 2016) .
Another strand of empirical literature more closely related to this paper deals with analyzing how targeted programs can aect non-cognitive skills, and the eect this has on economic behavior. Again, there is a substantial quantity of research in this area that studies WEIRD 2 populations. The focus on non-WEIRD populations is more recent but increasingly rich. For instance, Bernard et al. (2014) and Krishnan and Krutikova (2013) nd that targeted interventions increase measured levels of locus of control and self-ecacy, a concept closely related to locus of control, and other non-cognitive skills.
The former also nds evidence of positive eects in savings behavior in the short run 2 Western, educated, industrialized, rich and democratic (WEIRD) for a sample in rural Ethiopia while the latter shows better early labor market outcomes for a young population in Bombay. Lybbert and Wydick (2018a) nd increased levels of hope among a sample of indigenous women in Mexico that were exposed to a light-touch intervention targeting aspirations, and at the same time, nd modest positive eects on enterprise revenues and prots for participants of the program. In a similar spirit, Baranov et al. (2020) show that a brief light-touch intervention in a population coming from an informal urban settlement in Kenya aimed at promoting gratitude, self-armation, and aspirations succeeds at increasing a gratitude index, but fails to have eects on decision making. The scant and mixed evidence of behavioral responses to these targeted programs give space for holistic approaches to be further evaluated and analyzed in order to understand the main drivers of the observed economic impacts.
These programs aiming at bettering non-cognitive skills vary widely in duration and approach which makes it hard to draw clear-cut conclusions about their ecacy, especially for the interest of this paper since little has been studied of their eect in the context of graduation programs. The only analysis of the relevance of such programs in graduation contexts that we are aware of is the one by Sedlmayr et al. (2020) .
The authors nd some indication that a coaching intervention complements other transfers, perhaps bolstering investment in productive assets and, more strongly, promoting positive psychological attributes. Nevertheless, their design doesn't allow to clearly isolate the eect of coaching. Overall, coaching interventions of the sort incorporated into graduation programs are intended to generate and strengthen a battery of non-cognitive skills, including the motivation and ability of a person to design and carry out plans, and to adaptively learn and problem solve. These interventions are substantially longer than the light-touch targeted interventions mentioned earlier and incorporate a strong hand-holding component, since implementers consistently state that individualized attention is crucial for the success of the program (de Montesquiou et al. 2018). From this perspective, coaching can be seen to develop what might be termed attitudinal assets that, akin to other assets, permit individuals to realize improved standards of living. Carter (2016), Lybbert and Wydick (2018b) and Malacarne (2019) develop theoretical models that incorporate how psychological assets may aect economic decision-making. A simple way to think about it is to consider these attitudinal assets as a type of total factor productivity in a simple production function of the type y = αf (k). f (k) is the production function that depends only on capital and α is the attitudinal total factor productivity. This way of thinking about the problem implies that even if a given household knows precisely how to turn k into y, what ends up mattering is what they believe they can do with k to turn it into y. These assets would determine what a given household beliefs can achieve and guide its decisions 3 .
Besides the theoretical case for focusing on the importance of these assets, the choice of measuring particularly locus of control and hope is empirically justied by the strong evidence of even short and impersonal interventions having eects on these variables. In the following section we expand on both these concepts.
1.3 Psychological instruments: Locus of Control and Hope
The locus of control measures the degree to which people believe they can control the events that aect their lives. It dierentiates between an external locus of control and an internal one. According to Rotter (1966) , having an external locus control means that the individual believes that the successes or failures in her life are controlled by external forces that she cannot control. On the other hand, an individual is said to have an internal locus of control if she considers that she has control over the outcomes of events in her life.
To measure this concept, we used the Levenson (1981) I-P-C (internality-chance-powerful others) scale, which is commonly used in the literature. This scale measures one index for each internality, chance and powerful others. The internality scale measures the extent 3 As in Lybbert and Wydick (2018b), we focus on underperceptions of α, while for the context of the study, overperceptions may be less relevant. If α = γϕ, where ϕ is the true productivity, our analysis concerns situations in which γ < 1 to which people believe they can control their own lives. Contrary to internality, the chance scale measures the perception of chance being in control of your life. The powerful others scale measures the belief that life is predictable essentially because it is dominated by powerful third parties (leaders local, government, some god, etc). The chance and powerful others scale aim at understanding the forces at play behind the beliefs of a person with an external locus of control.
To build each index, respondents have to answer whether they agree or not with a question and to what extent. Examples of questions included are: for internality, when you make plans, are you almost certain that you can make them work? For chance, when you're doing well in life, is it because you're being lucky? For powerful others, Is what happens in your life determined by powerful people?. Higher values of both chance and powerful others imply a more external locus of control. We chose not to reduce the dimensionality of these indices because we wanted to understand precisely which type of external locus (chance and powerful others) an intervention as the one we propose ends up aecting, if any. We standardize each scale to give them mean zero and unit variance to provide a more comparable interpretation for impacts. Appendix 1.A shows the complete questionnaire that was asked. We eliminated 2 questions of each scale because they were not appropriate for the context for a total of 6 questions per scale. We adjusted the language so that they were more understandable for the context of rural Peru. We adjust the answers for the presence of acquiescence bias following Rammstedt et al. (2013) given the challenges that measuring non-cognitive skills brings in rural contexts (Macours and Laajaj (2020) ).
Stability of the locus of control Locus of control was initially proposed as a relatively stable personality trait. On the other hand, there's been a general consensus on the malleability of domain-specic locus of control. There's a plethora of evidence that shows how this locus of control responds to dierent interventions (panic attacks (Katerndahl 1991) , memory loss (Hastings and West 2009) , driving (Huang and Ford 2012) ). Nevertheless, there are strands of the literature that have provided evidence that the general concept is also prone to change (Menec et al. (1994)
Our measure of hope comes from Lybbert and Wydick (2018a) . This measure of hope is aspirational, in the sense that the individual actively seeks positive changes, and the envisioning of being able to achieve such changes comes from a strong sense of agency.
The measure is made up of 3 separate indices that we combine into one: aspirations, agency and pathways. Agency or self-ecacy, is the belief of being able to achieve specic goals, and pathways refers to the individual's ability to seek solutions to the problems that they may face when they want to meet a certain goal. To measure aspirations we ask questions such as: Is it better to learn to accept reality than to dream about the future? Or, Is it better to have aspirations and dreams for your family than to accept each day as it comes? For agency or self-ecacy, Can you think of several ways to solve a problem that arises in your farm?. An for pathways an example of a question is if the sales of your farm are low, do you know how to nd other buyers? Participants answer the same way as they answer the locus of control questions. First the say whether they agree or disagree, and then to what extent. The possible answers are: totally disagree, disagree, agree, or totally agree. In order to reduce the dimensionality, we create a unique index from these three measure that and summarize this reduce measure as hope, following Lybbert and Wydick (2018a) . We follow Anderson (2008) on his approach to create a summary index from a set of multiple outcomes. This measure is also standardized. Higher values of the index indicate higher hope levels. Appendix 1.A shows the complete questionnaire we used to build this measure. 2012 ). Initially, the program was designed to give the beneciaries of Juntos Peru's main CCT program sucient tools for them to insert themselves on a robust growth path and not depend solely on the transfer. As stated by FONCODES, the dependency within MIDIS in charge of implementing HW, the motivation behind HW is that low-income rural households should have the sucient capabilities to allow them higher levels of productivity and diversication of activities. HW aims at solving this problem as it is a capacity-building program that focuses on increasing the autonomous income of households so that they can graduate from poverty. From 2012 to 2018, more than 230,000 people have participated in the program with a cost close to USD 600,000,000 (2017 PPP) 4 .
The program has two dierent main components: Product 1 and Product 2 (FON-CODES (2016)). Product 1 consists of delivering training and assets related to agricultural technologies and of the improvement of housing conditions. The transferred assets usually include animals such as chickens or guinea pigs, materials to build sheds for these animals, improved seeds, and where water is available, infrastructure for irrigation. It is important to note that not everybody receives the same package. The program uses a needs-based approach, encouraging participants to demand transfers that suit their interests and needs and in congruence with their surrounding environment.
A member of the community is in charge of the technological training. This person is called a Yachachiq and she pays bi-monthly visits to each household during the rst 4 All USD values will be expressed in 2017 purchase power parity 10 months, monthly visits in the subsequent year, and sporadic visits in the last year of the program. The Yachachiq is usually selected because of her farming skills and knowledge, and is responsible for visiting around 30 to 40 households. The Yachachiq oers training to household members in how to prepare organic fertilizers, in pasture and forage management, in how to build a vegetable garden and in how to raise small animals (chickens and guinea pigs in particular). The latter two are usually aimed at the adult female of the household, since women are traditionally in charge of gardening and of taking care of small animals. Most of the asset transfers and training happen during the rst year of the intervention. The program also builds a new kitchen in case the old one is inside the household and provide guidelines on the adequate distribution of physical environments and solid waste disposal. All participating households receive Product 1. Product 2 consists of nancing business ideas of groups formed by households that are successful at winning a contest. These groups consist of 3 to 4 households that get together and design a business plan with the guidance of a Yachachiq. The business ideas are then presented in a fair where local leaders and other members of the project vote to choose which projects are the most viable. 40% of the amount delivered must be invested in technological and commercial assistance, while the rest must be dedicated to the acquisition of goods or supplies. Around 40% of HW participants participated in the contest, and about half of those participants won. Overall, the cost of the implementation per household was around 4600 Soles (USD 2640).
Treatment is oered at a village level. FONCODES denes the characteristics that have to be met by individual villages in order to become eligible. A list of all the villages that meet their criteria is then sent to the regional authorities for them to choose the villages to intervene.
In 2017, our cohort of study, the eligible villages were made up of those that belonged to districts 5 in the border (usually, districts characterized by being in the Amazon) and by those that met the following requirements: 5 Districts are the immediately higher administrative division. 1. Villages characterized by subsistence agriculture according to the 2012 agricultural census. This implies that the average size of the agricultural unit 6 in these villages has to be less than the median for all the villages in the agricultural census.
2. Villages belonging to districts with a poverty rate higher than 40% or to districts prioritized for the implementation of the reduction of chronic child malnutrition.
The coaching program is a 9 month program that aims at helping participants achieve typically a productive goal chosen by themselves. The program was designed by social workers and social-psychologists at the Institute of Peruvian Studies (IEP) that had previous experience on this topic and that used as inspiration the structure of similar programs.
The program has two main objectives. First, it aims at fostering of self-awareness and the recognition of the surrounding environmental conditions so that each person can fully grasp how they perceive themselves and in which context they are situated. The coaching takes place while the core of HW is being developed or it is closed to being nished. This is a key element of the potential success of this ancillary intervention since it aims at putting into perspective the new possibilities that become available because of the trainings and transfers that the beneciaries have had access to. Second, participants are encouraged to develop a plan to achieve a goal to accomplish on a set time frame. The idea is that the rst component facilitates the fulllment of the second one. Beyond the immediate scope of the ancillary intervention, the experience of the coaching should help beneciaries build 6 An agricultural unit is dened as the plot or group of plots used totally or partially for agricultural production, including livestock, by an agricultural producer, irrespective of the size, tenure regime or legal situation. (INEI (2012)) 7 The NBI is an index proposed by ECLAC widely used in Latin America to identify critical deciencies on a given population in order to characterize poverty. In Peru, the index is build according to the following indicators. 1) Households with inadequate physical characteristics. 2) Households with overcrowding. 3) Households without any kind of drainage. 4) Households with children that do not go to school. 5) Households with high economic dependence. up psychological assets that may aid in the achievement of productive goals. Because of this reason, it mostly targets the person in the household that participates the most in HW. At the same time it is also designed to actively involve the spouse and other family members.
The program was implement by sta trained by the program designers. It is worth noting that the trainers are not certied coaches, but usually people with previous experience in technical assistance programs with knowledge of the context and economic conditions of the beneciaries of the program. In order to not confuse HW participants, the coaches were never current Yachachiqs. They did not identify as HW staers so that the participants were aware that they were not bringing any additional materials or assets for them. The coaching sessions were individual and would usually last about 2 hours. There were 18 sessions in total, with a session taking place every two weeks and sometimes weekly. This coaching module was divided in two phases. The rst phase which lasts two months is mostly focused on setting up an achievable goal and on recognizing the ways to reach it. In the sessions of the second phase, the coach monitors the steps and actions the participant is taking to achieve her goal. It focuses on overcoming the struggles and barriers the participant may be encountering on her path to reach her goal. By doing this, the coach also works on the development of non-cognitive skills that help fulll the participant's plan. It is important to notice that this intervention gave no additional resources to the participants for them to use towards the goal completion. Appendix 1.B shows a table with the type of goals the participants set for themselves and the titles of of the sessions that were part of the program. The guide that was used by the coaches is available from the author upon request.
Up until now, we've gathered three rounds of surveys for this project. A baseline in late 2017-early 2018, a second survey in October 2018 where we gathered information on participants networks, and a midline survey in early 2020. Figure 1 .1 shows a timeline with the dates of the surveys and the start and span of the interventions. As mentioned earlier, the core of the asset transfers and training occur during the rst year, so at least one full agricultural cycle has passed under the inuence of the intervention. This allows us to capture changes in income in the midline survey. The coaching intervention nished just before the midline survey. Because of this, we are not able to capture the eect of this ancillary intervention on income. We expect to be able to capture this eect when we run the endline survey in the second quarter of 2021. By then, a full agricultural cycle would have gone by after the end of the coaching intervention. 1.4.4 Methodology
We imposed a series of restriction to the villages that satised the criteria outline in Section 1.4.1.1 in order to get our sample. We did this in three stages. First, we kept only the villages that had a high presence of Juntos (the CCT program) population. We imposed this restriction since most graduation-type programs also have a cash transfer component. As mentioned in Section 1.4.1, HW started as a program targeting Juntos but now this is no longer a requirement. Villages in 5 departments satised this criteria: Ayacucho, Cajamarca, Cusco, Huánuco and Ancash. In the second stage, we kept villages that belonged to districts where at least one village selected to be intervened had 60% to 70% of their population with at least one NBI, and at least one village with 50% to 60% their population with at least one NBI. Our identication strategy rests on the discontinuous jump in the probability of being selected into treatment at the 60% NBI threshold. Hence, we chose a window small enough so that the villages were comparable but wide enough to be able to have the statistical power to identify the potential eects of the program. As we will show in the following sections, we are able to show that the sucient conditions for a consistent identication of the program eect hold for our chosen window and sample. After this second stage we ended up with 28 villages to the left of the threshold and 40 villages to the right. Of these 40 villages, only 28 had been selected by HW for intervention. In the third stage, in order to increase the proportion of villages selected for treatment, we eliminated the ones the we were able to prove that due to their characteristics had had a low probability of being chosen. These were villages that according to the local authorities that were in charge of the program implementation, would not get selected because they were too far away from the rest of eligible villages. This is a valid criteria for exclusion since HW operates in places where they can gather at least 400 participants in relatively close proximity. This usually involves grouping multiple villages together under the umbrella of a unique committee (Nucleo Ejecutor Central) that is in charge of implementing and overlooking the program. 7 villages in total exit the pool this way: 1 village to the left of the threshold, 2 selected villages to the right and 4 unselected villages to the right 8 . Additionally, two other districts were excluded. The rst one because it had a high proportion of unselected villages to the right of the threshold (6 out of 8) and the second one because in the calls made to this region it was reported that no village in this district had been selected by the program.
After this last stage, 24 villages remained in the study that were to the left of the threshold and 29 villages to the right. The villages to the left are the control group and those to the right are intention-to-treat (ITT) group. 26 out of the 29 in the ITT group were villages selected to be intervened by HW. Based on information provided by the local authorities, we thought initially that only one village of the control group would end up being selected for treatment. This would have implied that the percentage of households intervened in the control group would have been around 5%. However, through the surveys we found out that the number of villages selected for treatment in the control group was higher. 8 Using information from the National Institute of Statistics and Informatics (INEI in Spanish), we constructed maps of the districts included in the study. Based on these maps and the distance information obtained through calls to the regions we obtained the travel time between each village and the HW-eligible villages in their same district. We excluded the 7 villages for which the travel time to the closest eligible village was greater than 1 hour and 45 minutes.
The percentage of households intervened by the program is 24% in the control group and 72% in the group ITT. Figure 1 .2 shows a diagram with the initial distribution of villages over the NBI score variable. Each marker on the diagram represents a village.
We further selected a random sample of villages initially assigned to HW that did indeed receive the program for the additional coaching intervention. Following Baird et al. (2018) we implemented a partial population design in which we oered coaching in 16 of the 26 villages where HW was actually implemented. The other 10 only received HW. Our objective is to estimate not only the direct eects of coaching but also the possible spillover eects of those treated by coaching towards those who did not receive this treatment. A randomization at the village level where in the selected village the treatment is oered to the entire sample does not allow us to estimate this eect. A saturation design enables us to identify this potential spillover eect.
The most basic saturation design is the partial population design. Besides the 10 control villages where no one received the additional treatment, we also have untreated households in the villages where treatment was oered. These treated villages are assigned a coaching saturation level of less than one. The saturation level is nothing more than the proportion of households within the village sample that are to receive the treatment. In this case, the saturation level of the villages where the coaching will be oered is 50%. This design allows us to identify the existence of a spillover eect of coaching from the treated to the untreated within the villages with a positive saturation. Our chosen saturation and proportion of treated villages maximizes the statistical power to identify not only the eect on the treated but also the existence of possible externalities.
The initial sample available for the study was as follows: 338 households in the 23 villages in the HW control group and 661 households in the 26 villages assigned to the HW ITT group. These villages belong to 5 dierent departments (Ancash, Ayacucho, Cajamarca, Cusco and Huanuco) and to 11 dierent districts in those departments. Due to the fact that some households were not located in the midline survey and the exclusion of a district in which the baseline information was found not to be credible, the total number of households in both surveys is 784 (261 observations in 20 villages and in the ITT group of HW with 523 observations in 25 villages), down from 873 valid surveys in baseline.
Table 1.C.1 in Appendix 1.C compares baseline characteristics between those that exit that sample and those who remain. None of the dierences are statistically signicant.
In the 16 villages treated with HW and coaching, our population of interest (the universe of households that are both HW and Juntos users) is 477 households. Our sample size in those villages is 338 households. To achieve an eective saturation level of 50%, we oer coaching to 239 households, which is half of the households that belong to our population of interest. 142 of these households come from our sample and 97 are out of sample households . It is important to point out that 84% of the households in the sample that were oered coaching participated in at least 4 sessions. This means that these households nished at least the rst phase of the soft skills program.
Our sample at the midline survey is reduced to 287 village households with both HW and coaching. Of the HW villages that were not treated with coaching, we have 201 households. Of the 142 households that were oered coaching we have information for 126 of them in both surveys. This last group is the ITT of coaching program. 1.5 Estimation Strategy 1.5.1 Balance Village assignment to HW was not random. To be eligible for treatment, a village had to meet a series of requirements as described both in Section 1.4.1.1 and Section 1.4.4, including that at least 60% of the population had at least one NBI. To carry out the evaluation, we chose to compare villages that had 60% to 70% of their population with at least one NBI, with those that had 50% to 60% of their population wtih at least one NBI.
In order to estimate the eect of the program consistently, the only relevant variable that jumps discontinuously at the threshold must be the assignment variable. We show that the set of variables relevant for our study are balance locally by estimating the following model:
where Y i,v,0 is the relevant variable for household i in village v at baseline, HW v is a dummy variable equal to 1 if village v is to the right of the threshold of the running variable and 0 otherwise, and Xv is the running variable (percentage of households with at least one NBI) centered around 0. If the sample is balanced, there should be no discontinuous jumps at the threshold, implying that τ should not be statistically signicant for the variables.
A usual rst step to see whether the condition of no discontinuous jump at the threshold holds for covariates is to visually inspect how the variable behaves before and after the threshold. Figure 1 .3 shows a picture for the internality index. As expected, the index is higher for relatively richer villages (to the left of the threshold) and falls as the running variable moves to the right. Once it hits the threshold there is no discontinuous jump, which provides some evidence favoring the fulllment of the sucient conditions for the consistency of the estimator. The formal test which is estimating the model presented in
Equation 1.1 for all the relevant variables is presented in Table 1.1. Variables included Figure 1.3: Internality index at baseline -.5 0 .5 1 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 NBI Average village value Fitted values 95% CI Internality,Baseline, fitted values in this table are variables that the literature suggests may be correlated with psychological attributes. Besides the psychological variables the table includes: annual baseline income, households characteristics such as household size and plot size, characteristics of the household head including sex, age and years of schooling and a variable indicating if the household has used fertilizer in the past. τ is not signicant for any variable. Furthermore, a chi-squared test based on a system of seemingly unrelated regression with as many equations as baseline covariates cannot reject the null hypothesis that the discontinuity gaps are jointly equal to zero.
Table 1.1: Balance, RD (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) Treatment 921.68 0.54 0.61 1.01 0.31 -0.01 -0.11 0.20 -0.16 0.18 0.07 (639.78) (0.83) (0.64) (0.74) (0.38) (0.05) (0.11) (0.14) (0.20) (0.21) (0.14) NBI rate -9703.32 -6.64 4.67 -11.93 -6.50 0.23 3.25 -2.14 -1.37 0.27 -1.21 (11934.04) (7.64) (10.48) (15.24) (5.16) (1.01) (2.53) (2.26) (2.74) (1.87) (2.01) NBI rate × Treat. -3639.37 -1.95 -12.63 3.68 0.84 -0.09 -4.58 -2.67 4.89 0.61 -1.07 (15506.86) (17.33) (13.18) (18.98) (7.47) (1.17) (3.45) (2.90) (4.47) (3.94) (2.88) R 2 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.03 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 N 742 767 784 784 784 784 784 784 784 784 784 Standard errors clustered at a village level in parenthesis. All models include xed eects per district. Dependent variable for each column is as follows: (1) Income (Soles), (2) Amount of land at disposal (hectares), (3) Years of education of household head, (4) Age of household head, (5) Household size, (6) Sex of household head, (7) Has used fertilizer, (8) Internality Index (9) Powerful others Index, (10) Chance Index, (11) Hope index *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.
Balance for villages assigned to coaching We test for balance between villages that were assigned to coaching and those that were not. These villages are all to the right of the threshold. Table 1 .2 shows the mean for the same variables as in Table 1 .1for villages with no coaching (only HW) and the villages selected for coaching and the dierence between the two. Household heads in the coaching villages are disproportionately female relative to non-coached villages: 21% are female in the former and only 14 % in the latter. This dierence is signicant at a 5% level. The rest of the variables are balanced. We again conduct a chi-squared test based on a system of seemingly unrelated regression with as many equations as baseline covariates and it cannot reject the null hypothesis that the dierence between the means of the two groups are jointly equal to zero.
Table 1.2: Baseline balance, coaching villages No coaching Coaching Di (2-1) Socio-economic char. Total Income 3795.34 2969.68 -825.66 Plot size (ha) 1.96 2.34 0.38 HH head eaducation 6.37 6.61 0.24 HH head age 41.71 41.85 0.14 HH size 4.62 4.38 -0.24 HH head sex 0.15 0.21 0.06* Technology Has used fertilizer 0.75 0.77 0.02 Psychological characteristics Hope Index -0.02 -0.01 0.01 Internality Index 0.01 -0.02 -0.03 Powerful others Index -0.05 0.07 0.12 Chance Index 0.00 0.03 0.03 N 236 287 Standard errors clustered at a village level. *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01 1.5.2 Specication 1.5.2.1 Eect of the program on income We rst investigate the regression discontinuity intention-to-treat (ITT) eects on income measured by our midline survey (t = 1). The impact of the HW program is estimated using (straightforward) variations of the following model:
where Y i,v,t is the annual income of household i in village v in period 1. The rest of the variables are the same as in Equation 1.1: HW v is a dummy variable equal to 1 if village v is to the right of the threshold of the running variable making the village eligible for treatment and 0 otherwise, and Xv is the running variable (percentage of households with at least one NBI) centered around 0. We also include ϱ i,v,0 which is a vector of control variables for household i in village v. This vector includes baseline income and all the variables in Table 1 .2. The error terms of Equation 1.2 are clustered at the village level to account for the nature of the assignment to treatment.
Heterogeneous eects on income. We investigate potential heterogeneous eects in the midline income level by running separate regressions for dierent subgroups of households. In particular, our regressions dierentiate between households with baseline levels of psychological measures below or above the median for each of the four psychological constructs. Running the above model with interactions to account for the potential heterogeneities may lead to inconsistent estimates of τ (Calonico et al. 2019) .
We rst estimate the regression discontinuity intention-to-treat (ITT) eects on psychological variables measured by our midline survey (t = 1). For this end, we rst run the same model as in Equation 1 .2 but with each of the four psychological variables as dependent variables. This regression will reveal the eect of being eligible for the programs on the psychological variables. We then proceed to estimate the regression discontinuity intention-to-treat (ITT) eects of the additional coaching intervention on psychological variables on the midline survey (t = 1). In order to achieve this, it is useful to identify three distinct groups to the right of the threshold that received dierent combinations of interventions:
1. Only HW. For this group, HW g v = 1 and 0 otherwise. This group only receives HW.
The superscript g intends to dierentiate this group from the variable HW v which is equal to 1 for all households in villages to the right of the threshold.
2. HW+Spillover. For this group, S i,v =1 and 0 otherwise. This group is comprised of households that did not receive coaching but that belong to villages v where coaching was oered. They only receive HW and potential spillovers from coached households.
3. HW+Coaching. For this group, C i,v = 1 and 0 otherwise. This group is made of households that were oered the coaching intervention additionally to HW.
In order to estimate the distinct eect for each of the three groups, we compare each of them with the pure control group. For this, we estimate the following model:
, depending on which eect its being evaluated. The error term (ε i,v ) is clustered at the village level to account for within-village error correlation.
Households that were oered coaching had to be HW participants. Our research design did not contemplate a treatment arm where a subgroup would only receive the coaching intervention. Taking this into consideration, the model represented in Equation 1.3 may be biased when comparing the control group with households that were oered coaching.
To account for the possibility of this bias, we restrict the analysis to HW participants to the right of the threshold and estimate the following model:
where again P i,v,1 is the any of the four psychological outcomes for the household head in village v in household i in period 1, C i,v =1 if household i in village v was oered the coaching and 0 otherwise, S i,v =1 if household i in village v was not oered the coaching but belonged to a village where coaching was oered to others and 0 otherwise, and ϱ i,v,0 is a vector of control variables for household i in village v. The model represented in Equation 1.4 will then have as a control group HW participants in non-coaching villages and will allow us to estimate the eect of coaching and spillovers on psychological variables.
The results of the models in Equations 1.2-1.4 provide a complete picture of how the psychological variables are aected by HW and by coaching, both directly and indirectly.
Figure 1 .4 shows graphically the result for Equation 1.2. The results from the linear model are presented in Table 1 .3. The rst two columns show the results for the whole centered bandwidth, from -0.1 to 0.1. The eect of being assigned to HW is close to USD 1100 in annual income and USD 800 when we include controls. For the model with controls, the eect is close to 40% larger than the average value for the households to the left of the threshold. Moreover, when we choose a smaller bandwidth, the eect is even larger.
Columns 3 and 4 show the results for a centered bandwidth that goes from -0.05 to 0.05.
The eect for this bandwidth is slightly larger for the model with no controls and for the model with controls shown in column 4, the eect is USD 1000. The results are robust to these specications. We further estimate a non-parametric model using a triangular kernel and an MSE-optimal bandwidth selector. The eect of the local linear model with controls increases substantially and the ITT estimate is now over USD 1400. Table 1 .4
shows the result for this estimation. 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 Soles -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 NBI Effect of HW on midline income Heterogeneous eects on income. The previous results show that the HW intervention has
We now proceed to analyze the eect of the programs on psychological variables. On this section we explore the eect of being to the right of the threshold (being eligible for HW and in some places also for coaching) on the psychological variables in the midline survey.
In the next one we look specically to the eect coaching has on these variables. Figures 1.5 and 1.6 show graphically the results for Equation 1.2 for two variables, internality and powerful others, for illustrative purposes with no covariates. The rst one shows what appears to be a discontinuous jump at threshold, while for the second one the jump is less evident. To formally test whether there is a discontinuous jump, Table 1 .6 presents the impact of the HW treatment on all of the psychological variables. Columns 1 to 3 show the variables associated to Locus of Control (internality, chance and powerful others) and column 4 presents the Hope3 Index. The following columns have the same dependent variables but the regressions include baseline controls described in Section 1.5.1 plus baseline levels of the dependent variable. All of the regressions include xed eects per district.
The table shows that HW has a positive eect on internality and on the aggregate measure of hope. Without controls, the eects of the HW intervention on these two variables are 0.22 and 0.32 and are statistically signicant at a 5% and 1% levels, respectively. The psychological indices have been standardized. For a household that has a value of 0 for these two indices, belonging to a village just to the right of the threshold would imply moving from the 50th percentile to the 58th and 63rd percentile, respectively.
Higher values for the chance and powerful others indices imply an increase of externality.
Belonging to a village to the right of the threshold decreases the chance index and slightly increases the powerful others index, but none of these eects are statistically signicant.
The inclusion of baseline controls had only a modest eect of the point estimate for the intervention. As the ndings are robust to the exclusion of baseline controls, for the rest of the analysis conducted in this paper we only present impact regressions with baseline controls. -1 -.5 0 .5 1 Internality -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 NBI Effect of HW on Internality Figure 1.6: Eect of HW on Powerful others Index -.5 0 .5 Power. oth. -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 NBI Effect of HW on Power. oth.
The evidence until now tells us that being to the right of the NBI threshold increases both the measures for internality and hope. But what is the role of the ancillary coaching intervention on the psychological variables? Do households with coaching increase their psychological indices more than households without it? If the answer to the previous question is yes, this fact together with the nding of heterogeneous eects of the program by baseline levels of psychological variables would provide indicative evidence of the potential of this intervention to further benet households in terms of increased income.
Our study design allows us to answer this question. A subgroup of the villages assigned to HW were also selected to participate on the coaching program which was oered randomly to around half of our sample in each of the selected villages. This means that to the right of the threshold there are three distinct groups: i) households in villages where only HW was oered, ii) households in villages where HW and coaching were oered but who didn't receive the latter intervention (from now on referred to as the spillover group of households), and iii) households in villages where HW and coaching were oered and who were invited to participate in the coaching program (coached households). We estimate Equation 1.3 for each of the psychological variables comparing those to the left of the threshold with each of these groups. We further compare the treatment coecients for each variable to test whether these are dierent across the three groups.
Table 1.7 presents the results for these regressions. The rst column shows the results for the three regressions for internality. The eect of coaching is positive and signicant at a 1% level. This eect is 4 times bigger than the eect for spillover households. In contrast, the eect for households that only received HW is negative and very close to 0 and it is not statistically signicant. Households in the spillover group appear to benet from the fact that their neighbors are being exposed to the ancillary treatment, but as we noted the eect is not signicant. We test the joint hypothesis of equality for these three coecients and we can reject it at a 5 % signicance level (last row in the table). The table also shows a signicant eect for chance. The coaching intervention decreases this measure, implying that there is a shift towards a more internal Locus of Control in that dimension. In the results in Table 1 .6, there was no signicant eect. With the result presented in Table 1 .7 it is possible to see that this is due to the fact that the eect comes from the coached households and it is oset by the null result for the only HW group. The test for the equality of the three coecients does not reject the null hypothesis. When testing only for the equality of the coecients between only HW and HW + Coaching the null hypothesis is rejected at a 10 % signicance level. The eects of both HW and the spillovers are also negative but small and not signicant. The eects for the powerful others index are positive, except for the spillovers group. There are no signicant eects for any of the three regressions for this index. Nevertheless, it is interesting that there is an increase in the coecient for coaching and HW. This could be reecting the fact of an increased reliance on both the Yachachiq and coaching agent, which would be an unintended consequence of both programs. The eect for the Hope3 index is signicant for all three regressions. The eect for the coaching subgroup (0.48) is more than 50% larger than for those assigned only to HW (0.31). Moreover, the eect on the index for households only assigned to HW is sizable. For the rest of the indices, the eect on the psychological variables appeared to come mostly from the coaching intervention. But for the Hope3 index, both interventions seem to increase substantially its value. The size of the eect for the only HW subgroup goes in line with what practitioners believe about the eect on "life attitudes" and "psychological outlook" of the lessons learned from Yachachiqs and interactions with implementers of HW (Conger 2016) . The test for the equality of coecients across the three models does not reject the null hypothesis. The p-value for the χ 2 statistic of the test comparing the coecient for the only HW subgroup regression with that of the coaching subgroup regression is 0.11, making the dierence only marginally not signicant.
Table 1.7: Regression discontinuity impact on psychological variables, by treatment group, Household head Internality Chance Power. oth. Hope3 Only HW -0.04 -0.03 0.11 0.31*** (0.13) (0.16) (0.15) (0.09) HW + Spillovers 0.11 -0.05 -0.03 0.27* (0.12) (0.12) (0.16) (0.15) HW + Coaching 0.44** -0.29* 0.16 0.48*** (0.17) (0.16) (0.18) (0.13) Control mean -0.04 -0.09 -0.14 -0.14 H 0 : τ HW = τ HW +S = τ HW +C p -val, χ 2 .011 .122 .322 .185 Standard errors clustered at a village level in parenthesis. All models include xed eects per district. Included baseline controls are land size, household size, years of education of the household head, age of the household head, if the household head has ever used fertilizers of any kind, sex of household head and baseline annual income. Also, baseline levels for each psychological characteristic. *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.
Table 1.8: Average impact of coaching on psychological variables, Household head, HW participants Internality Chance Power. oth. Hope3 Coaching 0.06 -0.29** -0.00 -0.05 (0.13) (0.11) (0.11) (0.07) Spillover -0.04 -0.05 -0.15 -0.17** (0.10) (0.10) (0.11) (0.07) Constant -0.14 1.37*** 0.88** -0.30 (0.50) (0.38) (0.41) (0.43) R 2 0.23 0.16 0.19 0.16 N 357 357 357 357 Standard errors clustered at a village level in parenthesis. All models include xed eects per district. Included baseline controls are land size, household size, years of education of the household head, age of the household head, if the household head has ever used fertilizers of any kind, sex of household head and baseline annual income. Also, baseline levels for each psychological characteristic. *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.
These results imply that indeed there are gains in terms of increased psychological outcomes from being exposed to coaching. Both internality and chance shift towards a more internal locus of control, and the Hope3 measure also increases, although the dierence between the HW intervention and the coaching for the latter is not big enough for it to be statistically signicant. When accounting for potential selection bias, we see that the chance index for the coached households reveals a more internal locus of control compared to households that only receive HW. Putting together the pieces of evidence, there is indicative evidence that the ancillary coaching intervention could help make the HW intervention a better program. The betterment of the psychological variables through coaching together with the heterogeneous responses of income favoring high values of baseline psychological measures (particularly internality), point at a direction through which coaching may help increase economic outcomes.
Eects of coaching on agricultural practices on the short term. These midline results do not allow us to see an eect of coaching on income since the program ended too close to our latest survey. We focus our attention on agricultural practices that are bound to see changes in the short run and that may lead to future returns. in particular, we look at the practices that may change as a consequence of the goals that participants in the program have set for themselves. Most of the participants set for themselves goals that aimed at increasing their agricultural income (Table 1 .B.1 in Appendix 1.B). Among these, a high proportion of households wanted to increase their production of both guinea pigs and poultry. Technicians suggest that a rst step for achieving a higher production of these animals is to have them spend the night in pens. HW oered the materials and technical advice for each household to build a structure for their animals to spend the night. From our visits to the eld we were able to see that their were some households that had received the materials to build sheds or pens but that never started doing it.
Hence, there is space for the coaching intervention to have an eect on this practice.
Table 1 .9 shows the result for the same specication of Equation 1.3 but the outcome variable is a dummy equal to 1 if guinea pigs spend their night in a pen and 0 otherwise for column 1 and a dummy equal to 1 if chickens spend their night in a pen and 0 otherwise for column 2. The eects for both guinea pigs and chickens is signicant for the coaching subgroup. Coaching increases the probability of guinea pigs spending their night in a pen by 100% over the control group. It is also 10 percentage points higher than the eect of only HW and spillovers. But we can't reject the null hypothesis of these 3 coecients being the same. The eects are similar for chickens. Coaching increases the probability of chickens sleeping in a pen by 21 percentage points over the control, and 5 percentage points over the only HW and spillover groups. Although the dierences between groups are not signicant, these midline results may indicate future increased gains in income associated with the production of these animals.
Table 1.9: Regression discontinuity impact on whether small animals spend their night in a pen, by treatment group Guinea pig pen Chicken pen Only HW 0.22** 0.16 (0.09) (0.10) HW + Spillovers 0.22** 0.16 (0.09) (0.10) HW + Coaching 0.32*** 0.21** (0.08) (0.08) Control mean 0.30 0.25 H 0 : τ HW = τ HW +S = τ HW +C p -val, χ 2 .32 .402 Standard errors clustered at a village level in parenthesis.The model includes xed eects per district. Included baseline controls are land size, household size, years of education of the household head, age of the household head, if the household head has ever used fertilizers of any kind, sex of household head and baseline annual income. Also, baseline levels for each psychological characteristics and baseline levels of whether guinea pigs (model 1) and chickens (model 2) spend their nights in a pen. *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.
Poverty alleviation programs aiming at exclusively relaxing material constraints associated to households in extreme poverty may be missing an opportunity to enhance the economic eects of the program by not directly targeting psychological attributes. The loosening of internal constraints through a life skills coaching module proves to be an eective way of shifting the locus of control towards a more internal axis, making participants gain a sense of control over their lives and of increasing hope, which fosters an optimistic outlook about the future. Participants that enter the program with high levels of these measures are shown to make better use of the resources oered by the program since their midline measures of annual income are substantially larger than those with lower initial values.
Our research questions were designed to help us unpack and understand how graduation programs work. These midline results point towards an answer. We were able to capitalize on this unique scenario of a graduation-type program and measure whether coaching by itself moves the needle of psychological attributes that have been found to be determinant of investment and technology adoption decisions. The endline survey will allow us to close the loop and conrm whether in eect, the suggestive evidence of the relevance of coaching on income through its eect on an increased level of internality is in fact true. As noted by Valdes et al. (2021) , there may be a dierence between psychological assets that have been formed based on previous experiences and related to personality traits and those that are being exogenously created by the type of interventions described in this paper.
It could be that economic decision-making is primarily dened by the former, limiting the behavioral eect of the intervention. Nevertheless, coaching may be a way to start a process of endogenous build-up of psychological assets, and the endline survey will help understand whether this is the case.
Related to the previous issue, it remains to be seen whether the changes in the psychological variables are permanent. The literature regarding the stability of these measures, in particular the one associated with locus of control, is not conclusive. Our endline survey in the third quarter of 2021 will shed light on whether these eects are persistent or they dissipate with time. Moreover, we will have to account for the eects that the COVID-19 may have had on the livelihoods of the people in our survey. Transport in the country was disrupted for almost six months, decreasing the number of potential buyers for their products. For instance, the price of potato, which close to 70% of our sample produces and consumes, fell close to 70 % during the rst months of the pandemic. This implies a major shock to their income. Also, since transportation was restricted, seasonal workers had a very dicult time transporting themselves to other locations. The government set up a fund to grant credit to smallholder farmers so that they can nance the 2020-2021 agricultural cycle. But these credits arrived late and were not available for the start of the sowing season. It is very likely that the upcoming agricultural cycle is done with few inputs which will most likely aect the quantity and quality of the harvest. Hence, it may be the case that there is little relief from the COVID shock anytime soon. This shock may well undermine the gains made with the coaching intervention.
Wuepper, D., Zilberman, D., and Sauer, J. (2020). Non-cognitive skills and climate change adaptation: empirical evidence from ghana's pineapple farmers. Climate and Development, 12(2):151162.
Table 1.B.1 shows the categories where the goals set by the participants that nished all the coaching modules fall into. The goals related to small animals were mostly about building better pens for both chickens and guinea pigs so that the production could grow.
Other agricultural related goals included increasing the number of cows, planting improved seeds for a variety of crops, making proper sheds for pigs, among others. Non agricultural goals included having a bakery, a restaurant and selling handcrafts.
Table 1.B.1: Types of goals set by coaching participants Goals Number of households Percentage of total Related to small animals 81 43% Other ag goals 71 38% Non-ag goals 37 20% Total 189 Table 1.B.2: Coaching sessions, part 1 Coaching modules, phase 1 Session 1: Getting to know me Session 2: My personal goal for the benet of my family Session 3: My reality and options to achieve my goal Session 4: My action plan Table 1.B.3: Coaching sessions, part 2 Coaching sessions, phase 2 Session 5: My new habits and thoughts Session 6: Commitment to what I want to achieve Session 7: Making changes to solve diculties Session 8: Knowing resilience Session 9: Looking for solutions Session 10: Good communication in the activities I do Session 11: Perseverance to achieve what I set out to do Session 12: Acknowledging my fears Session 13: Assessing my goal progress Session 14: What I learned from these trainings 1.C Attrition Table 1.C.1: Attrition HH in BL and ML HW in BL Di (2-1) Socio-economic char. Total Income 4780.12 5002.16 222.03 Plot size (ha) 2.15 2.08 -0.07 HH head eaducation 6.34 6.72 0.38 HH head age 41.67 41.49 -0.17 HH size 4.52 4.29 -0.22 HH head sex 0.18 0.26 0.07 Technology Has used fertilizer 0.41 0.34 -0.04 Psychological characteristics Hope Index -0.00 0.01 0.01 Internality Index -0.00 0.03 0.04 Powerful others Index -0.01 0.11 0.13 Chance Index 0.00 -0.00 -0.00 N 784 89 *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01 Standard errors clustered at a village level Chapter 2 Graduation programs and heterogeneous impacts: exploring sources of dierentiated eects. Juan Sebastian Correa Graduation interventions have proven to generate substantive gains in productive out-
comes for smallholder farmers in dierent pilot studies across multiple locations. Nevertheless, its impacts have been shown to be heterogeneous, and those beneting the most are usually the better o. With the aid of simulations generated by an innite horizon model parametrized to mimic a rural economy where households may be stuck in a low equilibrium, we aim at characterizing the importance of two possible sources of heterogeneity covariate shocks and initial psychological assets in the impacts of a graduation program that transfers both physical and psychological assets. We nd that purging risk from the model has distributional eects that favor those in the middle percentiles of the conditional distribution for two productive outcomes (assets and production) relative to a case where the households are exposed to signicant covariate shocks. Also, households with high initial levels of psychological assets (which act as an eective total factor productivity in our model) and of physical assets outperform those with lower initial assets.
In recent years, programs that aim at eliminating rural poverty by oering a package of interventions have become increasingly common. Multifaceted approaches intend to provide a big push out of poverty to beneciaries and set them on a productive path.
The most common of these approaches are poverty graduation programs which consist of oering productive asset transfers, cash transfers, and nancial literacy and livelihood trainings for a period of time usually spanning between 2 and 3 years. The evidence shows that these programs are highly eective. Banerjee et al. (2015) , which popularized the approach, show substantial positive impacts on a number of key indicators including productive assets, income and revenue for six dierent countries. In India, one of the countries in the previous study, Banerjee and Duo (2011) report a 15% increase in household per-capita consumption 18 months after the beginning of the program. Considering program costs, this increase translates to a return of 27%, while investing the cost of the program in a xed deposit account would have implied a return of around 10%. Bandiera et al. (2017) nd that for a similar program targeting poor women in Bangladesh, the earnings of the beneciaries increased by more than 20% relative to the control group, and sizable eects are also reported for productive assets 4 years after the initial transfer.
The ecacy of these programs has also been demonstrated in conict-aected regions. Arguelles et al. (2019) show that a program targeting poor women living in rural villages in Afghanistan is highly eective. Consumption and assets, among other well-being indicators increase substantially and the authors calculate an internal rate of return of 26% two years after the initial transfer.
As impressive as these impacts are, they are also highly heterogeneous. Banerjee et al. (2015) report that the pooled eect of the program in the six countries (India, Peru, Honduras, Ethiopia, Ghana, Pakistan) on asset accumulation is 10 times larger at the 90th percentile than at the 10th percentile. Bandiera et al. (2017) nds similar results.
The eect of the program on productive assets at the lower percentiles is small and not statistically signicantly dierent from zero, while at the upper percentiles it increases to around PPP US$ 3000. In Arguelles et al. (2019) the impact on the value of livestock (Haushofer and Fehr 2014) . Another strand of the literature has focused on the impacts of poverty and negative events on subjective capacities, perceptions of control over one's life or on how such situations may instill hopelessness about the future, and how this translates into decisions that may perpetuate poverty (Lybbert and Wydick 2018; Wuepper and Lybbert 2017; de Quidt and Haushofer 2016; Moya and Carter 2019) . One avenue through which these psychological perceptions of one's own capacities may operate and aect optimal decision making is by distorting the returns to investments. Individuals with low psychological assets could end up underinvesting the resources transferred by the program. Chapter 1 and Krovetz (2021) provide evidence in this regard from programs in Peru and Kenya.
In order to account for these possible sources of heterogeneity, we use a dynamic programming model and simulate the impacts of a means-tested graduation intervention which changes the initial levels of both physical and perceived agency in an economy exposed to covariate shocks. In parallel, we build a perfect counterfactual economy not exposed to the intervention, allowing us to estimate both an average treatment eect (ATE) and also the program's impact at dierent percentiles of the conditional distribution (quantile treatment eect, QTE) of a series of outcomes that measure economic well-being. We proceed to purge risk out of the model by eliminating the covariate shock, which enables us to compare the ATE and QTE impacts of the intervention with and without risk exposure 1 . After transforming the simulations to a riskless situation (or to a situation with beneciaries that are completely insured), we further measure how initial dierences in perceived agency aect the impact of the program. This step-wise account of potential sources of heterogeneities allows us to assess the relevance of both of these factors in generating dierentiated eects of multifaceted programs.
How to strengthen the eects of graduation programs for a broader portion of the targeted population is still an open question. Recent research on graduation programs has sought to disentangle the eects of individual program components (Sedlmayr et al. 2020; 1 Shocks only aect physical assets. We assume that psychological assets are already low enough and are not responsive to negative events. Bossuroy et al. 2021) . Interestingly, life-skills training modules appear to amplify the eect of the intervention on the outcome variables, including the accumulation of productive assets (ibid), providing empirical evidence of the relevance of addressing psychological constraints and how it aects economic outcomes.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2.2 describes the model, showing how risk and initial levels of psychological assets can aect decision-making. Section 2.3 explains in detail the graduation intervention and how it is incorporated into the model . Section 2.4 shows the eect of the program at the mean and at dierent percentiles in the conditional distributions of a series of economic outcomes. Section 2.5 explores the importance of covariate shocks and initial levels of psychological assets as sources of heterogeneity in in the impact of the graduation program and Section 2.6 concludes.
Following closely Carter and Janzen (2017) , we propose an innite horizon model for household i. The household has initial physical assets A i0 and initial psychological assets P i0 2 . We assume psychological assets, which in our model are represented by perceived agency, do not evolve with time and that in the same spirit of Carter (2016) and Lybbert and Wydick (2018) may be understood as an eective total factor productivity. An individual has both an eective and potential total factor productivity. In our model, individuals with low levels of agency will not take the necessary actions to realize their potential total factor productivity. de Quidt and Haushofer (2016) shows empirically that if an individual becomes too pessimistic about the returns to her eort, she may choose to exert low levels of eort or even no eort at all and as a consequence will not learn about her true returns to eort. Similarly, we assume that although in our model people will always engage in a productive activity, the low level of psychological assets will lead to a self-conrming expectation where individuals will not learn about their potential since they do not take small necessary measures planning, paying attention, being organized 2 For simplicity, the psychological assets of the household are those of the household head.
that will reveal their full potential. Hence, the production function will reect this psychological reality.
Household i seeks to maximize consumption c it solving the following problem:
where the rst constraint implies a consumption level lower than or equal to the value of physical assets plus income. The second constraint shows that households may choose from two dierent technologies for production. We assume that γ h > γ l , so that the household has to choose between a technology with high and a low productivity. The high productivity one has a xed cost F , implying that it is only worthwhile using such technology if assets are equal to or larger than an asset level Ā 3 . The third constraint shows the equation of motion for physical assets. Assets in period t + 1 are the savings from period t (remaining cash after consumption) plus assets from period t that remain after being subject to a covariate (0 ≤ ϵ t+1 < 1) and idiosyncratic shock (0≤ θ i,t+1 < 1) 4 . Covariate shocks are the same for all households and idiosyncratic shocks are specic to each household. These shocks are realized after the consumption decision in period t has already been taken and before each household makes a decision for period t + 1. Figure 2.2.1: Joint distribution (a) Initial (b) After graduation transfer is normally distributed while physical assets follow a uniform distribution. Both the covariate shock distribution and other model parameters are presented Appendix 2.A.
We solve the model using value function iteration. For each period t, household i chooses optimal consumption based on its perceived agency level (which we assume does not change with time) and the expectation of physical asset holdings at the end of the current period. Model parameters are chosen to reect a rural economy where a poverty traps exists. The non-convex technology and the chosen parameters generate both a low and a high level equilibrium. The existence of the two equilibria implies that there is a threshold dened by both assets for which households with initial combinations of assets below it converge to the low level one, and the opposite is true for those that start o with assets above it. This Micawber threshold, as Zimmerman and Carter (2003) dene it, is represented by the dashed line in Figure 2 .2.1a.
Graduation programs have gained in popularity in recent years because of the impressive impacts reported from pilot studies in multiple locations around the world. In the poor positive correlation between the two types of assets. Nevertheless, this correlation structure will most likely accentuate our ndings. Exploring this further is part of our future research agenda.
the source of this gain in this paper 6 .
As in the real world, we target households by means testing. Eligible households are those for whom A i0 <A, where A represents an asset poverty line, or the assets associated with the low steady state. These households receive a transfer equal to A at the end of period 0, implying that in the absence of negative shocks, all treated households will start period 1 at or above this poverty line. Programs in reality transfer assets that represent a signicant portion of the annual income of the beneciaries. Blattman et al. (2016) report on a program transferring a grant that was 2.5 times larger than the annual earnings of beneciaries, while Banerjee et al. (2015) describes that the transfer to Ethiopian farmers was worth PPP US$1228 per household.
Complementing the physical asset transfer, all eligible households (those for which A i0 <A)
receive a psychological asset transfer, P, in period 0 that increases perceived agency at the beginning of period 1. The size of the transfer is based on Chapter 1, where we report the eects of a graduation program in Peru and are able to disentangle the contribution of a coaching component to changes in a series of psychological assets. 6 In Chapter 1 we are able to experimentally tease apart the eect of the coaching component in a graduation program in Peru on a series of psychological variables, nding evidence of its importance 59
To run the simulation analysis, we randomly choose 1015 households (dened by combinations of initial levels of physical and psychological assets) from the space in Figure 2 .2.1a such that A i0 <A. This subsample is our control group. We clone this subsample and give this new subsample the graduation package. This is our treatment group. The control and treatment groups form our empirical sample for which we simulate the model for 10 periods. For each period, every household is subject to the same covariate shock but to their own household specic idiosyncratic shock that destroy a portion of the accumulated assets.
In the next subsections, we estimate the ATE and QTE for the observations in the 10th period. Each period represents an agricultural cycle that lasts close to 6 months. Hence, after 10 periods (5 years) we would be capturing the medium to long-term impacts of the program.
It is worth highlighting that the noise in our model is only coming from the small idiosyncratic shocks. This is reected in the narrow condence intervals presented in the following analysis. Also, the subsequent analysis only shows the realization of one covariate shock structure. Of course, varying this covariate shock structure will undoubtedly generate dierent results. We randomly chose a covariate shock structure where the shocks were substantially large in the rst ve periods, and where there were no shocks afterwards.
We imposed this restriction in order to allow the dynamics to act for enough periods after the shock before reaching the 10th period such that the paths towards the equilibria are more clearly established. Since our aim is to create an analogue to a real-world scenario, assuming a unique covariate shock structure for all the sample is a defensible assumption.
The approach described above mimics an RCT with the advantage that by construction both samples are identical, hence, we get a perfect counterfactual. Equation 2 .1 shows the model we estimate to compare the the treatment and control groups, where τ is the ATE.
y i,t represents the outcome variable for household i en period t and G i is a dummy equal to 1 if household i received the Graduation package. Table 2 .4.1 shows the results for the previous regression for period 10 for four dierent outcomes: consumption, value of assets, production and variable that is equal to 1 if household i is non-poor and 0 otherwise. The latter variable takes into consideration whether the production level for household i (its potential earnings) would, under optimal behavior, yield a consumption level equal to the consumption poverty line. In other words, this poverty line is the consumption level associated to the low equilibrium. The table shows that physical assets are almost 70% larger for the treated households compared to the control group. Consumption is slightly lower for the treatment group, showing that treated households are initially using resources for investment. Production value slightly increased and the probability of escaping poverty increases by 26 percentage points relative to the control group. It is worth noting that under the scenario presented, households suered a series of covariate shocks in the rst periods that destroyed a significant portion of their assets, explaining the change in assets being lower than the transfer, which was equal to A=7.
Figures 2.4.1a and 2.4.2a show the results for the quantile regressions for assets and production. Figure 2 .4.1a shows that treatment eects on assets are nonnegative at each quantile, but they are signicantly larger for quantiles larger than 0.4. For lower quantiles, the eect of the intervention is zero, except at the 0.1 quantile, considering a 95% condence interval. At this quantile, the eect is 4 to 6 times smaller relative to the eect reported at the top quantiles.
Figure 2.4.2a shows the eects on production and reveals a similar pattern to the previous one: at lower quantiles, the impacts are smaller relative to the eect reported at larger ones. The eect is even negative at the lowest quantiles. The results for both outcomes show that the ATE, represented by the dashed line in each gure, hides an underlying heterogeneity that becomes manifest when considering the impact eects across the conditional distribution. These results are highly consistent with what has been found in the empirical literature (Bandiera et al. 2017; Banerjee et al. 2015 ) (b) No shocks 2.5 Heterogeneity decomposition 2.5.1 Risk The previous results reveal that the eect of the program is highly skewed towards higher quantiles. Thus, even within asset-poor households, there is signicant variation in the eect of treatment. Up until now, the analysis has considered a scenario where both treatment and control groups are exposed to signicant covariate shocks that destroyed assets in the rst periods. The advantage of using simulations is that it allows us to easily switch on and o certain parameters or change situations that may shed light on the underlying mechanisms explaining observed empirical results. Shock exposure is one (b) No shocks of these scenarios, where using real-world data to uncover its distributional eects on outcomes may be very challenging.
Table 2.5.1 shows results for the the model presented in Equation 2.1 if we articially eliminate the covariate shocks (the small idiosyncratic shocks are still present). This can also be thought as if a social protection mechanism kicks in and replaced the lost assets. The eects for the four outcome variables are clearly higher without the presence of the covariate shocks. Asset accumulation more than doubles relative to the control group, compared to the shock scenario where the increment was less than 50% of the asset holdings for the control. Both consumption and production also increase much more under this world with no risk relative to the control group. These results are not surprising. Asset destruction will lead to lower levels of asset accumulation, consumption and production.
It is worth noting that the probability of being non-poor increases by 37 percentage points.
These results reveal that the ATE increases when risk is eliminated. Taking a look QTE for this scenario will reveal how removing risk aects the quantile eects, and shed light on whether upper percentiles are beneting more from the program relative to lower ones. for assets and production there are benets from the graduation program, and that the eects at quantiles larger than 0.25 are larger than the ATE. Eliminating risk does make the impacts of the intervention positive and economically relevant for a larger number of quantiles. A second result that stems from this scenario is that at higher quantiles the eects dissipate, and the largest eects are reported at middle quantiles. The treatment eect increases for both assets and production until the 0.6 quantile but decreases at upper quantiles. In a world with no risk, households with higher initial assets will not benet much from the intervention since they will reach the high equilibrium eventually.
If households could perfectly insure against risk, the impacts of the program would be more wide-spread. But there is still a signicant amount of beneciaries for which the intervention generates no gains. We look at the eects of the program accounting for dierent initial levels of assets, both physical and psychological, in order to further understand potential sources of observed heterogeneities. We do this by estimating Equation 2 .2 below using OLS:
where
cal assets) is above the median value, and 0 otherwise. The last two terms of Equation 2 .2 consider the interaction between the graduation program and each of the previously described dummies. These terms will shed light on whether households who have initial assets physical and/or psychological above the median, benet more from the program. This entails testing whether β 3 and/or β 4 are equal to 0.
Table 2.5.2 presents the results for the estimation of Equation 2.2. The table shows
that those that start o with high initial levels of physical assets and perceived agency outperform households with lower initial assets. The only exception is for those households with an initial high level of perceived agency, whose consumption is lower relative to those with a low initial level. This can be explained by their comparatively large factor productivity (perceived agency) which shifts the allocation of resources towards more investment. This is possible to see when looking at the eects on asset accumulation of having above median initial perceived agency. The results are substantial and relatively bigger than the eects associated to having initial physical assets above the median. The same holds for production and poverty, with the chances of a household being non-poor also increasing signicantly, while the eect is more muted for households with above median physical assets.
The interaction terms also display mostly positive results. For consumption, the extra boost that the graduation program gives in terms of transfers of both assets generates a positive eect. Even those that are above the median in terms of initial perceived agency benet from the program, and this eect overshadows the negative one, making the overall eect on consumption positive for this subgroup. The eects on assets and production follow the same pattern: larger eects are reported for households with high initial assets, and the results are stronger for high initial levels of perceived agency.
The results for the poverty variable are very telling. The constant is equal to -0.04, which reects that households that start o with low initial levels of both assets have no positive probability of exiting poverty after 10 periods. This results shows what we already new from Figure 2.2.1b: households below the Micawber threshold are stuck in the low equilibrium.
where P L i (A L i ) is a dummy equal to 1 if the initial level of perceived agency (physical assets) is below the median value, and 0 otherwise. This model disaggregates further the previous results since it clearly dierentiates between four groups:1) below median initial levels of physical assets and perceived agency (reference category), 2) below median initial level of perceived agency and above median initial level of physical assets, 3) above median initial level of perceived agency and below median initial level of physical assets, and 4) above median initial levels of physical assets and perceived agency.
Table 2.5.3 below shows the results for this regression.
For consumption, graduation has the most impact for group 4. Group 3 benets much more from the transfers than group 2, although the direct eect of belonging to group 3 as is the one for belonging to group 4. These two groups would have sacriced present consumption for future gains regardless of the graduation transfer. This is further evidenced by the impact results on asset accumulation, where again the direct eects of belonging to each of those two groups is high compared to belonging to group 2 and to group 1.
The eect is more than twice as big for group 4 compared to group 3, which speaks to the relatively good position from which group 4 started o. Also, the impacts of the program are the largest for group 2 and the smallest for group 4 (not considering group 1). Again, group 4, and to a certain extent group 3, could have performed well without the program.
Similar results are obtained for production. The only dierence is that the impact of graduation for group 2 is lower than that for group 4. This does not change that the overall impact is the largest for group 4. Finally, the results for the variable representing being non-poor summarizes the previous ndings. For group 4, the eect of graduation is almost 0, implying that in the absence of the program this group of households, in the absence of risk, would have escaped poverty anyway. The importance of the program increases as we go from group 4 in order down to group 1. Table 2.5.4 summarizes the results from the previous table by presenting the overall eect on the outcomes (net of the constant) for group 2, 3 and 4. We additionally present what
percentage of the eect is explained by the program. These results present a very clear picture of the importance of the program for each of the groups dened based on initial levels of physical assets and perceived agency. For consumption, the program is clearly benecial for groups 3 and 4. Without the intervention, these two groups would have consumed much less, and this would have been specially for the rst few periods.
For assets, the eect reverses. The graduation transfers are the most important for group 2, for which almost all of the observed eect can be attributed to the intervention. For group 4, participating in the program only accounts for 50% of the observed eect, and this value increases to 72% for group 3. As stated earlier, these two groups would have signicantly invested in assets without the program. Production reects the same story than assets. And nally, we are able to see that only 4% of the reduction in poverty for group 4 can be attributed to the program, while this number increases to 16% for group 3.
For group 2 (and group 1 by denition) all of the eect on the variable reecting escaping the low equilibrium is attributable to the program.
This paper attempts to explore potential sources of the heterogeneous eects observed in graduation programs. We do this by simulating an innite horizon model where households make decisions on whether to invest in a high or low productivity technology, and where there is a xed cost associated to the high yielding one. The chosen parameters escape poverty. Again, the size of the transfers are the key element in this analysis. The size of the psychological transfer is in line with some of the literature in the topic, but may be on the upper bound. A future step is to look at how sensitive the model is to changes in the transfer size of both psychological and physical asset.
Simulations present obvious shortcomings. The parametrization, the shock structure and the transfer size determine the size of the eects. As mentioned earlier, understanding how the model responds to changes in some of these parameters, in particular the transfer size, is key to having a more robust model. At the same time, the model is meant to describe and not to predict. While this may limit the types of policy recommendations that may stem from this analysis, in particular those associated with transfer sizes, the paper may help to advance the way in which graduation and other similar multifaceted programs are targeted and rolled-out. In particular, our ndings call for increased eorts in understanding the complementarities between psychological and physical assets and to assess the psychological status of the target population before the transfer of assets take place. Exploring the correlation between the two assets may inform subsequent targeted transfers of both assets, in the form of additional time spent on life-skill coaching modules with those whose psychological assets have been found to be low. This may not necessarily imply increased costs, since the resources may come from reduced visits to households that are found to do well in terms of psychological assets. Varying the size of the physical assets may come at a higher political cost making it unfeasible in most scenarios. Exploring the eect of aiming at leveling of the eld in terms of psychological assets may pay o in terms of more evenly distributed impacts across the population.
Our model also highlights how expanding the program towards insurance literacy and the oering of such products may be benecial. To our knowledge, the nancial literacy modules in graduation programs do not focus on these topics, leaving an evident gap in terms of valuable knowledge about how to protect investments. Additionally, some of the program funds destined to each household may go directly towards insurance. On top of this, a progressive contributory scheme can be set up by the program and the pot may be used in case a shock hits, and it could insure not only against covariate shocks but also against idiosyncratic ones, although the latter would need further considerations.
Dierences in the impact of a coaching intervention between male and female-headed households in the context of a poverty graduation program Juan Sebastian Correa n this paper, we explore if a coaching module that aims at fostering an increased sense of agency embedded in a graduation program aects dierently male and female-headed households by analyzing its eects on two sets of variables: one reecting psychological assets of the household head and the other one a series of agricultural practices. We exploit the design of the program where a subset of households is oered the complete graduation intervention, including the coaching module, while another subset is not oered this intervention, to quantify if the coaching component aects the two types of households dierently. We nd that the coaching component does appear to increase more certain psychological variables for female household heads relative to the male household heads, but this dierence is not statistically signicant. We additionally nd that female-headed
Graduation-type programs target ultra-poor rural households with the aim of providing a big push out of poverty and setting them on a productive path. The results of these programs have proven to be impressive across multiple contexts (Banerjee et al. 2015; Bandiera et al. 2017; Arguelles et al. 2019) and eects have been shown to persist even ten years after the intervention (Banerjee et al. 2020) . Moreover, the results of the program have been reported to be highly heterogeneous and households at the top of the conditional distribution of productive outcomes are reported to benet considerably more from the intervention than those at the bottom (Banerjee et al. 2015; Bandiera et al. 2017) . In the second chapter of this dissertation we explore how shock exposure and initial levels of psychological assets of the household head may partially explain these dierentiated eects. There is reason to believe that a series of other initial characteristics may very well dictate the performance of households that are beneciaries of the intervention. Households with more assets may utilize better the resources the program transfers, or households with members with more years of education may get a better grasp of the training the intervention oers, which would then generate larger program returns. But since the program targets the ultra-poor, the expected variation in household characteristics is not big, and program implementers do not consider these dierences in their targeting nor in how the program is rolled-out.
Nevertheless, the sex of the household head of beneciary households is one characteristic that may determine vastly the program results and that is rarely considered a dening feature that merits special attention in graduation-type programs. There are programs of this type that are targeted to females (Bandiera et al. 2017) , but the majority are not 1 , including Peru's Haku Wiñay (HW). In this chapter, we focus on a particular component of the graduation program the coaching module and test if it dierentially aects a set of psychological variables that measure agency and hope for the head of the household and another set that reect the adoption of agricultural practices promoted by HW for a sample belonging to the 2017 cohort of beneciaries. As described in detail in Chapter 1, we have two waves of data collection (baseline and midline) to do this analysis. Moreover, the coaching is an ancillary intervention that only a subgroup of HW beneciaries are randomized into. This program aims at fostering self-awareness and the recognition of the surrounding environmental conditions so that each person can fully grasp how they perceive themselves and in which context they are situated. It also encourages participants to develop a plan to achieve a productive goal to accomplish on a set time frame.
In a nutshell, as this is laid out in detail in Chapter 1, we expect this intervention to positively aect the set of psychological variables that we measure. At the same time, this program may also generate behavioral changes in economic activities since it may motivate individuals to take full advantage of the transfers being made by the program.
We are not able to test the eect on income because the data which we are using to run this analysis was collected right after the coaching intervention nished, implying that coaching would not have aected the decision-making process associated to this outcome.
Nevertheless, coaching may have inuenced certain agricultural practices for which HW provided training and inputs. This paper studies whether this component aects dierently these two sets of variables for female and male household heads and their respective households.
In particular, we consider that given that female-headed households (FHH) may face harsher economic realities than male-headed households (MHH) and females face gender norms that are more stringent, FHHs would benet more from the coaching component relative to MHHs in the context of the graduation program. Moreover, this additional intervention was modestly ne-tuned to speak to the needs of women in order to make them feel more comfortable about discussing topics related to self-perception and futurerelated objectives, although the curriculum was exactly the same for all participating households. Contrary to female household heads (shortened to females from now on), we hypothesize that male household heads (shortened to males from now on) are already better equipped in psychological terms and the ancillary coaching intervention may have little eect on this population. We nd this theory to be partially true since indeed for the four psychological variables, males appear to be initially in a better position relative to females, although the equality of the two distributions is only rejected for two of the variables. Additionally, for three out of four psychological variables, females have lager values relative to males as a consequence of coaching, although the dierences are not statistically signicant. We expect a similar result for the adoption of agricultural practices: females may be further motivated by the program than males. Again we nd that for three out of four measured agricultural practices the eect is larger for FHHs.
One is signicant by conventional standards and the other is marginally signicant.
There is some evidence regarding the dierentiated eects when comparing these two types of households. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 3.2 expands on the program, the measured variables, the observed dierences between females and males, and FHHs and MHHs in our sample and briey describes our theory of change. Section 3.3 shows the results for the eects of coaching on the psychological variables, Section 3.4
shows the results for the eects of coaching on the adoption of agricultural practices, and Section 3.5 concludes. For locus of control, higher values for each of the three variables implies a more internal locus of control, meaning that a person has a stronger belief in them being in control of their lives, as compared to having a external locus of control, which gives more weight to external factors controlling life outcomes. The rst row in Table 3 .2.1 shows the number of males and females that are household heads and that are represented in Figure 3 .2.1. It is not surprising the strong imbalance favoring male households members self-identifying as the household heads.
The gures reveal that the distributions for males appear to rst-order stochastically dominate the female distributions. This implies that the male distribution for each one of the variables is shifted to the right relative to that of females, meaning that males have higher average values of these variables relative to females. A Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of equality of distributions for males and females reveals that the null hypothesis is rejected at a 5% signicance level for internality and hope Figures 3.2.1a and 3.2.1d a conrm that at least for these two variables, males have higher psychological assets than females.
One possible explanation for this fact can be related to how poverty and adverse situations have been shown to aect psychological wellbeing and the perception of one's agency, and how these situations may instill hopelessness about the future (Lybbert and Wydick 2018; Wuepper and Lybbert 2017; de Quidt and Haushofer 2016; Moya and Carter 2019) .
Female household heads, and in particular those living in rural contexts, have been usually
found to be face harsher economic realities than their male counterparts in addition to more limiting gender norms that may aect their self-condence. This is accentuated by the fact that they are also more time-poor than men, since they also have to do household chores and care work, which may manifest in a further decreased sense of agency. These combination of factors may explain these observed initial dierences. Nevertheless, there could be other explanations at play, and a deeper dive into economic and gender dynamics could enrich much more the understanding of these dierences. Such analysis falls beyond the scope of this paper.
Table 3.2.2 shows how MHHs and FHHs compare in a series of socio-economic character- (c) Powerful others (d) Hope istics and one variable that reects agricultural practices. FHHs are indeed poorer than male-headed ones as measured by annual income. They also are less educated by almost two years. These households also hold less land and the household heads are younger, although these dierences are not statistically signicant. FHHs are also smaller compared
to MHHs, which may be an indication that where females self-report to be the head of the household, there is no male counterpart 2 .
In this context, beyond the aggregate eect of the ancillary coaching intervention, one 2 Anecdotal evidence from the eldwork reveals that even if the male household member was no longer the main provider, or if he was most of the time away of the main residence, the female counterparts usually listed the males as the head of the household, even though she would be the main decision-maker. This fact may be decreasing the observed dierences reported in initial characteristics between MHHs and FHHs other inputs. The program has 7 modules 3 for which it oers trainings and requires the engagement of at least one family member. Hence, it is not required that the head of the household participates in all of the modules. These activities usually involve other family members, particularly the spouses of the male household heads. It may even be the case that the household head is not involved at all in any of the activities of HW.
In order to capture the eect of the programs, we estimate the following model by OLS:
where P i,v,1 represents either of the psychological assets of household i in village v in period 1. HW v is a dummy variable equal to 1 if village v is to the right of the threshold of the running variable making the village eligible for treatment and 0 otherwise, and Xv is the running variable (percentage of households with at least one NBI) centered around 0. Additionally, the fth term is the interaction between being to the right of the threshold, and a variable C i,v representing whether household i was selected for coaching in village v. We also include ϱ i,v,0 which is a vector of control variables for household i in village v. It is also possible for a household to belong to a village where coaching was oered and where coaching was not oered to them. We refer to this type of household as the spillover group. We account for this eect in the regression but we do not analyze it. In the vector of additional controls we include a term that captures the eect of the spillover eect. In order to compare the eects of the program between males and female household heads, we run this regression for each of these two groups and compare the coecients.
To get an unbiased estimate, we restrict our regression to include only HW or would-be HW participants. For those that were not invited to participate in HW, we asked in our midline survey questions regarding their willingness to participate in a program such as HW. We described its characteristics without mentioning the name in order to not create false expectations about the future oering of the program in control villages. Moreover, since the additional coaching intervention was designed to be oered to the person that participates the most in HW, this implies that not all the household heads of the households selected for coaching are the participants. Unsurprisingly, this is true in particular for MHHs. Virtually all female household heads participated in HW. Nevertheless, the coaching program was intended to be developed among all members of the households.
Although there was a main participant, many of the activities that the beneciaries had to develop included spouses and other family members. Hence, it is possible to think of the psychological variables reecting a sort of household level psychological status. Moreover, Table 3 .3.1 below reveals that there are essentially no dierences in the raw psychological variable measures among the households where the household head is not the HW participant, validating our choice of keeping the household head psychological assets as the variables to be analyzed. 3 .1 for the standardized measures of psychological variables at midline. Each column reects the estimated impacts for male and female household heads for each of the four psychological variables. The table reveals participation in HW has certain positive eects on some of the variables for both females and males: females appear to increase internality while males both hope and powerful others, the latter implying a shift towards a more internal locus of control. But our interest lies primarily on seeing the eects of coaching, since it is through this channel that we would expect to see greater changes in psychological variables. Most of the eects are positive, except for the chance variable of male household heads. Moreover, the eect on women is larger for three out of the four variables. Nevertheless, given the small number of women that are household heads, the signicance tests are underpowered. The gains in both chance and hope coming from coaching are sizable compared to those for males, although they are not signicantly different from each other. A larger sample may have yielded more precise estimated eects, but our sample size was set and budget considerations did not allow to expand the sample. The direction of the coecients point towards a positive eect of coaching on such variables. Another piece of evidence that shows that FHHs beneted in terms of increasing their psychological assets is presented in Figure 3 .3.1. This gure shows for each of the psychological variables the CDF function before and after the intervention for FHHs that were oered the coaching intervention. It is clear that for both chance and powerful others, (c) Powerful others (d) Hope
this before-after comparison reveals that there were was a positive eect of participating in both HW and the coaching intervention. For hope the eect is less clear, while for internality the picture is not illustrative. Nevertheless, a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test on the equality of the distributions is not rejected for any of the variables. As with the previous table, the low number of FHHs may be a potential reason as to why these positive eects are not conrmed by formal tests.
The main goal of including the coaching intervention is to assess the importance of the coaching component in graduation type programs. Our theory of change suggests that if coaching is indeed a relevant component of these interventions, we would expect it to 91 have an eect on psychological assets and these would generate increased eects on the variables that we use to measure wellbeing. Nevertheless, the timeline of our midline survey prevents us from fully evaluating the eect on outcomes such as income, since the survey captures agricultural income which constitutes the largest share of the household's income associated to harvests that took place before the coaching component was rolled out. Given this limitation, what we can explore with the midline data is the effect coaching has had on a series of agricultural practices that are encouraged by HW and that may directly inuence agricultural income and other outcomes such as food security in the following seasons.
We estimate again the model laid out in Equation 3.1 but considering as outcomes the following four agricultural practices: i) the preparation and usage of organic fertilizer, ii) the planting of vegetables, iii) growing seedlings in trays and, iv) cultivating pastures.
These four activities are encouraged by HW and the timing of the midline survey allows us to measure whether the participation in the coaching component had a direct additional eect on the adoption of these practices. We expect that if coaching is to be successful, beneciaries must change behaviors and adopt benecial agricultural practices, in particular those that HW has promoted and for which it has transferred inputs and knowledge. In this section we test whether MHHs behave dierently in terms of the adoption of such practices relative to FHHs. Table 3 .4.1 shows the baseline dierences for three of the practices. Unfortunately we do not have a baseline measure for the transplanting seedlings practice. The table shows that the baseline measures for the use of organic fertilizer and the cultivation of pastures is higher for MHHs than for FHHs. Still,the dierences are not very big and the use of these practices is not widespread, in particular for fertilizer use and the growing of vegetables.
Table 3 .4.2 shows the results for the OLS regression of the model expressed in Equation 3 .1 but using the four practices described above as outcomes, and controlling for their baseline levels. Again, we run the model separately for MHHs and FHHs and test the null hypothesis of the equality of τ 1 for both types of households.
The table shows that beyond several positive eects of HW on these variables, coaching also appears to generate some positive impacts. The coaching eect is positive for all the outcomes except for the transplant of seedlings where it is negative but very close to zero. Moreover, only the eect on the growing of vegetables is statistically signicant.
The eect on the preparation and use of organic fertilizer is just shy of being signicant at a 10% signicance level. As with the previous regressions, the estimated eects are not precise enough. It is striking that the eect of coaching is considerably larger for women in 3 out of 4 outcomes relative to the estimated eect for men. A Wald test for the equality of the coecients for MHHs and FHHs for the planting of vegetables is rejected at a 5% signicance level, while for the rest of the outcomes the equality can not be rejected. The p-value for the test for the preparation and use of organic fertilizer outcome is 0.11, making the dierence almost signicant. This is a particularly interesting eect.
At baseline both types of households planted vegetables at the same rate. Moreover, HW signicantly aects the rate at which MHHs plant vegetables, while the eect for FHHs is not signicant. The coaching curriculum did not mention any of the HW activities.
Hence, it must be the case that something about this training made FHHs more prone to adopting these practices.
As explained earlier, it is the case that some of the household members receiving the coaching are not necessarily the household heads. This is true for the MHHs, which implies that some of the participants will be the spouses. This means that if anything, the observed eects on MHHs would be biased upwards if the observed results are associated to females being able to make better use of the coaching resources. If this is the case, the dierences between MHHs and FHHs could larger than what is presented in the table.
In this paper we compare the eects of the coaching component on the psychological variables of female and male household heads and on the farming practices of both MHHs and FHHs. Our theory of change suggests that female household heads and their households should benet more from the coaching intervention given their low level of psychological assets at baseline. This should manifest in both increased psychological assets at midline and a higher rate of adoption of agricultural practices. We nd partial evidence support-ing this hypothesis since the estimated eects for both the psychological and agricultural practices are not precise enough. The low number of FHHs could explain the imprecise estimate eects. Nevertheless, we will have more data coming in from the endline survey soon which may help rene these estimates.
Our results suggest that in the context of a program that is transferring a signicant amount of assets and oering trainings and advice on agricultural practices, an intervention that addresses psychological barriers may serve as a catalyst for better results, in particular for those that may initially lack in motivation, sense of agency or hope, as we have shown it was the case for FHHs. It may happen that these interventions do little for those that already have a good foundation of these assets. It remains to be seen with the endline data how this translates to measures of economic wellbeing such as income, and also, if this additional intervention is cost-eective, given that it appears to only benet a subset of the participants.
At the same time, our results highlight the importance of accounting for dening characteristics when analyzing the eects of poverty graduation programs. Restricting this to adding a control variable may leave out a series of important insights that may help understand not only the size of the eects, but also potential sources of heterogeneity.
Nevertheless, expanding the analysis to be able to capture these dierences comes at an increase cost for the researcher, since in order to get precise estimates larger samples may be warranted.
Standard errors clustered at a village level in parenthesis. All models include xed eects per district. First two columns show a model with a bandwidth of [-0.1, 0.1]. Columns 3 and 4 show a model with a bandwidth of [-0.05, 0.05]. Included baseline controls are land size, household size, years of education of the household head, age of the household head, if the household head has ever used fertilizers of any kind, sex of household head and baseline annual income. Also, baseline levels for each of the four psychological measures. *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01. a positive signicant eect on midline income for our sample. We now want to investigate whether baseline psychological measures have any eect on the impact of the intervention on income.
The results for this analysis are presented in Table1
.5. The eects of the assignment to HW favor those above the median of the baseline level of internality (Panel A). For this group, the eect of assignment to treatment is around 1800 Soles (USD 1000 ). This
Standard errors clustered at a village level in brackets. Model includes xed eects per district. Included baseline controls are land size, household size, years of education of the household head, age of the household head, if the household head has ever used fertilizers of any kind, sex of household head and baseline annual income. Also, baseline levels for each of the four psychological measures. *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01. eect *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.
Standard errors clustered at a village level in parenthesis. All models include xed eects per district. Included baseline controls are land size, household size, years of education of the household head, age of the household head, if the household head has ever used fertilizers of any kind, sex of household head and baseline annual income. *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.
*p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.
*
*
*
In our current version of the model, the idiosyncratic shock is small and most all of the risk comes from covariate shocks. This specication aims to mimic sizable covariate shocks associated to climate related events.
This is a simplifying assumption. A closer representation of reality would most likely present a
Out of the 6 interventions reported byBanerjee et al. (2015) only one targets women, and none include an explicit gender focus.
The control group was asked to answer a hypothetical question regarding their interest in participating on a program similar to HW and if interested, which person in the household would be the most likely to participate.
The modules included the creation or expansion of an orchard, learning how to do organic fertilizer, agroforestry training, techniques to grow grains and tubers, the installation of irrigation, training in the proper management of small animals such as guinea pigs and chickens, and training in how to cultivate and store pastures. All these modules came with transfers.