Introduction
Poverty, psychosocial risk factors and graduation programmes
Programme and setting
Data and methods
Quantitative data and analysis
Sample
Dependent variables
Empirical strategy
Qualitative data
Results
Maternal mental health
Exposure to violence
Child stimulation
Robustness
Discussion and conclusion
Fig. 1 .
Table 1
Table 2
Table 3
Table 4
Table 5
Table 6
Table 7
Table 8
Table 9
Fig. 1. Theory of change of role of graduation programmes in reducing psychological risk factors for ECD. Source: Authors' own.
Overview of quantitative sample.
Demographic characteristics at baseline.Notes: p-values are reported from Wald tests on the equality of means across treatment and control.
Differential attrition analysis by demographic characteristics.
Attrition analysis per treatment group, by demographic characteristics.Notes: p-values are reported from Wald tests on the equality of means of the attrition groups across treatment and control.
Overview of case study respondents.
Overview of focus group and key interview respondents.
Baseline and endline values and Impact estimates for K6.
Baseline and endline values and impact estimates for exposure to violence and attitudes to child disciplining.Notes: Estimation of treatment effects are based on logistics regression. Robust standard errors, clustered by communities, in parentheses. Asterisks indicate significance level: *p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.
Baseline and endline values and impact estimates for number of stimulating activities undertaken with child 3-5.Notes: Estimation of treatment effect is based on random-effects GLS regression. Robust standard errors, clustered by communities, in parentheses. Asterisks indicate significance level: *p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.
Early childhood represents both a risky stage in life and a window of opportunity. Challenges such as poverty, nutritional deficiencies and lack of learning limit biological and cognitive development and deny children of their developmental potential (Walker et al., 2007 (Walker et al., , 2011)) . This, in turn, keeps people locked into poverty (Walker et al., 2011) . Improving children's lives in their early years is not only crucial for breaking intergenerational cycles of poverty, early childhood is also the most efficient and costeffective time in the life cycle during which to intervene (Engle et al., 2011) . Despite the importance of getting early childhood development (ECD) right, it is estimated that more than 250 million children under five years of age in low-and middle-income countries are at risk of not achieving their full potential (Black et al., 2017) Recent years have seen renewed impetus into the search for innovative solutions to improve ECD (Britto et al., 2017; Richter et al., 2017) . In the past, suggestions for policy options focused primarily on child development-focused interventions, such as par-enting programmes and child-care centres (Engle et al., 2007 (Engle et al., , 2011)) . Many of such interventions have led to positive impacts (Daelmans et al., 2015; Edmond et al., 2019) , particularly when delivered in an integrated fashion such as in India (Vikram & Chindarkar, 2020) and Colombia (Bernal & Ramírez, 2019) .
More recently, the importance of social protection is increasingly emphasised as part of responding to children's needs in a holistic manner (Richter et al., 2017) . Interventions that aim to reduce poverty and to support child development more broadly by combining economic support with complementary services (such as conditional cash transfers) can secure a nurturing and enabling environment for children (Black et al., 2017) . More generally, anti-poverty interventions may help to counteract biological and psychosocial risk factors, including undernutrition, maternal depression, poor caregiver-child relationships and violence (Engle et al., 2007; Walker et al., 2007 Walker et al., , 2011)) .
So-called 'graduation' programmes constitute a relatively new wave of comprehensive social protection and anti-poverty programming. Their rationale is grounded in asset accumulation theory and the notion that people living in extreme poverty require a big push into a positively reinforcing cycle of economic advancement (Carter & Barrett, 2007 , Hashemi & Umaira, 2011) to ultimately 'graduate' out of poverty (Devereux & Sabates-Wheeler, 2015) . Programmes provide a comprehensive mix of sequenced support, commonly including consumption support, asset transfers, access to savings and credit, training and coaching and mentoring (Arévalo et al., 2018) . Objectives are primarily focused on economic strengthening but can also include advancement of human capital, such as by including behaviour change communication in relation to dietary and sanitary practices (Roelen, Sherer, & Leon-Himmelstine, 2020) . The multifaceted nature of 'graduation' programmes and their explicit focus on weaning people off support in the short-to medium-term sets them apart from other antipoverty interventions. Conditional or unconditional cash transfers, for example, provide narrower support and aim to move people away from programme support in the long term, if at all.
Rigorous and cross-country evaluations of graduation programmes showcase positive impacts on consumption, assets and food security (Banerjee et al., 2015) . However, evidence with respect to outcomes of risk factors for child development is limited (Roelen, Sherer, & Leon-Himmelstine, 2020) . Studies provide testimony to positive effects on intermediate outcomes in nutrition and health (ibid), such as food security (Banerjee et al., 2011 (Banerjee et al., , 2015)) , dietary diversity (Devereux et al., 2019) , immunisation (Harhay et al., 2017) and health-seeking behaviour (Devereux & Sabates, 2016) . Despite strong associations between poverty, psychosocial factors and parenting practices (Walker et al., 2007) , the effect of graduation programmes on psychosocial risk factors, such as maternal mental health, cognitive stimulation and exposure of violence, is far less understood.
Using a mixed methods approach, this study adds to the literature by investigating the impact of a graduation programme on psychosocial risk factors underpinning ECD, and by exploring mediators that can explain (lack of) impact. Quantitative analysis is premised on quasi-experimental design that combines propensity score matching (PSM) and difference-in-differences (d-i-d) methods to estimate treatment effects. Qualitative data analysis is centred on in-depth case studies in combination with interviews and group discussions to unpack drivers and dynamics of change. We do so in a context of widespread and deep poverty in rural Haiti with large risks to child development. Findings of this study contribute to wider understandings of how comprehensive social protection and anti-poverty interventions may improve ECD and ultimately break the intergenerational cycle of poverty.
Psychosocial risks that hamper child development derive directly from parenting practices as well as from the broader context in which parenting takes place (Walker et al., 2007 (Walker et al., , 2011)) . Cognitive stimulation and caregiver responsiveness are crucial components of child-rearing to stimulate children's cognitive and social-emotional competence (Rao et al., 2017) . Beyond the childcaregiver dyad, maternal depression and exposure to violence may hamper child development (Surkan et al., 2011; Mueller & Tronick, 2019) . Living in poverty is strongly associated with the occurrence of these psychosocial risks (Grantham-McGregor et al., 2007) .
Despite strong evidence on linkages between poverty and poor child development outcomes, how and whether economic strengthening translates into positive outcomes for children is relatively poorly understood (Ssewamala et al., 2014) . While various evaluations attest to graduation programmes' positive effects in areas of health and nutrition, research in relation to psychosocial risk factors is very limited (Roelen, Sherer, & Leon-Himmelstine, 2020) . We draw on the wider evidence base on the impact of cash transfers and economic empowerment interventions to glean insights into how graduation programmes may affect three vital psychosocial risk factors, namely maternal mental health, exposure to violence and cognitive stimulation (Walker et al., 2007) .
Poverty and mental health issues represent a mutually reinforcing negative cycle (Lund et al., 2011) . Poverty increases stress, both as a result of greater exposure to stressful events and limited ability to cope with such events (Hjelm et al., 2017) . Evaluations provide a mixed picture of the potential for cash transfer schemes in improving mental health. In Zambia, unconditional cash transfers did not reduce perceived stress (Hjelm et al., 2017) . Similarly, a cash transfer programme in Ecuador did not reduce maternal depression (Paxson & Schady, 2010) and a programme in Nicaragua only led to marginal improvements in comparison to the control group (Macours et al., 2012) . However, interventions providing unconditional support in Kenya, Malawi and South Africa resulted in improved mental health outcomes (Baird et al., 2013; Haushofer & Shapiro, 2016; Angeles et al., 2019) . Another study in South Africa found that cash transfers can break the intergenerational transmission of poor mental health (Eyal & Burns, 2019) . Positive effects are often mediated through reductions in poverty-induced stress (Haushofer & Shapiro, 2016; Hjelm et al., 2017) . In India, cash transfers reduced occurrence of maternal depression as a result of cash transfers was explained by lower levels of debt associated with delivery care (Powell-Jackson et al., 2016) .
Emerging evidence on economic strengthening interventions points to the potential of graduation programmes for improving maternal mental health. In Uganda, family-based asset-and savings-based interventions reduced depressive symptoms and hopelessness among adolescents (Han et al., 2013; Kivumbi et al., 2019) . Poverty-reduced stress and collaboration at family level in making savings and investment decisions were deemed two important pathways to improved mental health outcomes (Kivumbi et al., 2019) . A multi-country evaluation of graduation programmes also found a positive impact on mental health, including reduced stress, at the end of programme implementation (Banerjee et al., 2015) . A mixed methods study in Burundi found that regular home visits by dedicated case managers contributed to feelings of confidence in the future (Roelen & Devereux, 2019) .
Exposure to violence and other child protection violations is highly associated with poverty (Barrientos et al., 2014; Peterman et al., 2017) . Various studies suggest that cash transfers can reduce the occurrence of domestic and intimate partner violence (IPV), and thereby young children's exposure to violence. In Bangladesh and Ecuador, cash transfer programmes combined with nutritional behaviour change communication significantly reduced IPV (Buller et al., 2016; Roy et al., 2019) . A mixed methods review of 14 studies also points towards mostly positive effects of cash transfer programmes, mediated through greater economic security and emotional wellbeing, reduced intra-household conflict, and women's empowerment (Buller et al., 2018) . Positive findings were also observed in relation to a graduation-style economic intervention for women living in poverty in Burkina Faso. Participation in this intervention led to significant reductions in emotional partner violence (Ismayilova et al., 2018) . It did not, however, lead to reductions in physical violence (ibid).
Childhood development is also negatively affected by other forms of domestic violence, including violence against children (VAC) and violence taking place outside of the home environment (Sherr et al., 2016) . Evidence about the impact of cash transfers on such forms of violence, particularly for young children, is thin. While impact evaluations point to positive impacts on sexual violence against adolescent girls, for example, little is known about how programmes may reduce any form of violence in early age (Peterman et al., 2017) . Reasons for lack of evidence are two-fold: First, reduction or prevention of violence does not tend to be part of programme objectives. Second, few evaluations are designed to measure or unpack impacts on childhood violence (ibid).
Various studies of cash transfers attest to their positive impact on cognitive development (De Walque et al., 2017) . Impacts were intensified when provision of cash was complemented with parenting interventions (ibid). Few studies consider the impact on cognitive stimulation as one of the intermediate indicators towards developmental outcomes. In Ecuador, programme participation led to greater availability of paper, pens and books and to parents spending more time reading with their children (Macours et al., 2012) . In Colombia, a cash transfer programme with an integrated psychosocial stimulation intervention led to improved home stimulation during the programme, but positive impacts were not sustained two years after programme end (Andrew et al., 2018) . Effects may have been too small to be sustained and children may also have moved into less stimulating environments (e.g. at school) as they are growing older (ibid).
In light of this review, we consider two main pathways through which graduation programmes may reduce psychological risk factors and ultimately improve ECD. First, improved economic outcomes through livelihoods support can reduce poverty-related stress and depressive symptoms, lessen intra-household violence and facilitate more stimulating environments. Second, noneconomic support in the form of training and mentoring can foster cognitive stimulation and support more harmonious intrahousehold relationships. There may also be potential to reduce violent forms of disciplining for children. This theory of change is depicted in Fig. 1 . Note that the linkages from reduced psychological risk factors to improved ECD are implied and are not empirically tested in this study.
This study focuses on the Chemen Lavi Miyò (CLM) programme in Haiti. It was first piloted in 2007 (Huda & Simanowitz, 2010) and has been implemented in different areas in central Haiti by NGO Fonkoze since then. The programme constitutes an adaptation of the 'graduation model' approach as developed by BRAC in Bangladesh (Werlin, 2018) . Over a period of 18 months, the programme offers intensive and tailored support, including: (i) weekly stipends of 350 Haitian Gourdes (approximately US $13 PPP 1 ) during the first six months of implementation; (ii) asset transfer (approximately US $155), (iii) support to join Village Savings and Lending Association (VSLA), (iv) weekly home visits by case managers, including health and nutrition messaging, 2 and (v) in-kind support such as materials for home repair and installation of latrine (approximately US $250) and access to the local hospital. This package of support, and the magnitude of their individual components, is in line with other programmes having adopted the graduation model approach (Banerjee et al., 2015) . The CLM programme is targeted at women -often with young children -living in extreme poverty. In addition to supporting income-generating activities and financial management, programme elements that may reduce psychological risk factors for ECD include case managers' messaging regarding in utero brain development and mediation in case of intra-household tensions (Werlin, 2018) . Previous studies have demonstrated positive effects, including the establishment of income-generating activities (Huda & Simanowitz, 2010; Pain et al., 2015) . Severe malnutrition among children appeared to be eradicated among all beneficiary households participating in the first pilot of the CLM programme (Huda & Simanowitz, 2010) . However, no follow-up study to assess sustainability of malnutrition outcomes or evaluation in relation to other outcomes for children is available.
This study was undertaken in Central Plateau in Haiti. Haiti is one of the least developed countries in the world, ranking 169th (out of 189) based on the 2019 Human Development Index (UNDP, 2019). Poverty is widespread with 59 percent of Haitians living under the national poverty line of $2.42 per day in 2012 (World Bank, 2018) and 41 percent of the population experiencing multidimensional poverty in 2016/17 (UNDP, 2019). More than 20 percent of the children under five are stunted (IHE & ICF, 2018) , the neonatal mortality rate was 25 per 1000 births in 2011 (Cianelli et al., 2014) and nearly one in 12 children died before reaching the fifth year in 2012 (IHE & ICF, 2018) . Research sites included in this study were located in two of the poorest departments in the country, namely Centre and Artibonite (IMF, 2014).
This evaluation is based on a mixed methods approach. Mixed methods approaches in evaluation have been lauded for their ability to unpack the 'black box' (Quisumbing et al., 2020) , and to bring richness of insights that are particularly pertinent for policyoriented research (de Haan et al., 2020) . This study combines purposively collected quantitative survey data based on quasiexperimental design with in-depth primary qualitative data. Research adhered to ethical protocol, including informed consent, anonymity in data analysis and dissemination and respectful conduct in the field. Ethical approval was provided by the Research Ethics Committee (REC) at [author -organisation].
The quantitative component of the evaluation is based on a quasi-experimental design. The sample for the treatment group (CLM members) was pre-determined by programming considerations, with all eligible women in the programme sites having been selected into the programme. Eligibility criteria included living in extreme poverty (based on a wide set of indicators), having dependants and being able to work. Ethical considerations, potential spillover effects and budget constraints precluded the possibility of either establishing counterfactuals within the same communities or undertaking a cluster-randomised control trial. The control group was therefore sampled from other communities in the Central Plateau region following a two-step process: (i) identification of communities that are similar to those where the treatment group are located; and (ii) identification of female respondents with similar living conditions as those within the treatment group. Communities were selected on the basis of longstanding experience and deep knowledge of the region within the Fonkoze team. Selection of female respondents into the control group was based on participatory wealth rankings within selected communities. These ranking exercises mirrored targeting processes for the CLM programme, thereby ensuring that women included in the control group match women in the treatment group to the best extent possible. The control group was over-sampled in order to maximise explanatory power, within the confines of budget constraints.
Baseline data for the treatment group was collected in June-July 2017 during which prospective CLM members received orientation training for the CLM programme. Data for the control group was collected August-December 2017. Endline data was collected in April 2019 for the treatment group and in May-June 2019 for the control group. 1 All US$ values are calculated at purchasing power parity (PPP), using market exchange rates and the World Bank PPP conversion factor for the period during which the programme was implemented. We use an average exchange rate of 62 for HTG/US $, and PPP conversion factor of 0.434.
2 Health and nutrition messaging revolves around key topics, including Vitamin A intake, good hygiene, preventing malnutrition, clean drinking water, preventing sexually transmitted diseases, pre-and post-natal care, family planning, preventing worms, vaccinations, preventing cholera and in utero brain development of children (Werlin, 2018) .
Table 1 provides an overview of the quantitative sample. We restricted the sample to women with children aged 0-5 at both baseline and endline. The sample includes 732 respondents, namely 373 CLM members (treatment group) and 359 control group members. Attrition rates averaged 28.8 percent with a larger attrition rate (32.3 percent) for the control group compared to treatment group (25.2 percent). Higher attrition among the control group was expected as there was no contact with Fonkoze between baseline and endline data collection; the control group was oversampled to account for this (as noted above). Analysis of demographic characteristics at baseline (see Table 2 ) points to a moderately balanced sample with a significant difference between treatment and control groups only in marital status and wealth index. 3 Analysis of attrition across treatment and control groups (see Table 3 ) points to similar spread of attrition across demographic characteristics. Attrition analysis within treatment and control groups (see Table 4 ) compares those lost to those who remain in the study on observable characteristics. Older women and those with fewer children aged 0-5 were more likely to drop out of the treatment group. However, as this study is primarily focused on understanding impacts for women in child-bearing age with young children, this attrition bias suggests low risks to external validity. 4 In sum, treatment and control groups are roughly similar in terms of demographic characteristics apart from wealth; the control group is significantly better off than the treatment group. Attrition is relatively equally spread and is slightly favourable to the particular group of interest for this study, namely women in reproductive age with young children.
We use the 6-item Kessler Psychological Distress Scale (K6) (Kessler et al., 2003) as indicator for maternal mental health.
Respondents were asked how often in the past 30 days they felt any of these six symptoms: nervous, hopeless, restless, so depressed that nothing could cheer them up, that everything was an effort, and worthless. Responses range from ''none of the time" coded 0 to ''all of the time" coded 4, with a maximum score of 24. A K6 score exceeding 13 indicates that respondents suffer from serious mental illness (Kessler et al., 2010) . The Kessler scales have been validated and successfully used across geographical and cultural contexts (Kessler et al., 2010; Wijeratne et al., 2011; Powell-Jackson et al., 2016) .
In order to gain insight into children's exposure to violence, we use information about how often women observe exposure of children to different types of violence and about attitudes to child disciplining. In terms of exposure to violence, respondents were asked whether they observed harsh corporal punishment, physical violence at home or physical violence outside the home of children in their community, with responses denoting ''never", ''sometimes" and ''often". With respect to child disciplining practices, women were asked whether they agree or strongly agree that it is okay to hit their child when it is disobedient. These questions are framed against the knowledge, attitude and practice (KAP) survey model, which is widely used to gain insight into health and child protection practices, including in Haiti (Tillyard & DeGennaro, 2018) . Questions are based on surveys used in contexts with concerns regarding child protection violations, such as in Rwanda (AVSI, 2013), and were tested during pilot and training phase before baseline data collection.
Cognitive stimulation is measured by the frequency of stimulating activities that adults in the household engage in with their children aged 3-5 in three days prior to the survey. This includes five activities, namely telling stories, singing, counting or drawing, reading or looking at (picture) books and. We count the number of activities undertaken with children aged 3-5 by the main woman in the household as well as by any other adult in the household, with a maximum score of 10. Questions are based on KAP survey questionnaires on ECD as developed by UNICEF and 3 Wealth index quintile variable is based on DHS methodology and includes variables for cooking fuel, source of drinking water, sanitation facilities, leaking roof, roof material, wall material, stove and radio. 4 We are unable to test for selection on unobservables directly as a reliable external data source was unavailable (Fitzgerald et al., 1998) .
implemented in diverse contexts such as Bangladesh (Begum, 2019) and Nicaragua (Macours et al., 2012) .
We use Propensity Score Matching (PSM) to overcome selection bias as a result of the study's quasi-experimental design, and then estimate the treatment effect of programme participation on psychological risk factors.
Given the study's quasi-experimental design, our main challenge is constructing a credible counterfactual. Selection of women in the control group was based on criteria that allowed for matching women in the treatment group to the best extent possible. However, to ensure this as far as possible ex-post, we first use PSM to better identify the control group-i.e. non-participants of the programme that are like participants-using information on observable characteristics (X). The procedure involves estimating the probability of programme participation and then comparing members of treatment and control groups with similar probabilities of participating in the programme.
We estimate the propensity score for a woman 'i' to be selected for the programme, which can be written as follows:
where P is a binary variable equal to one for treatment group and zero for control group, X is a vector of observed characteristics of women, and e is an error term. The score is calculated using the observed characteristics of women in our total sample at baseline, including both members (and part of the treatment group) and non-members (and part of the control group) of the programme. The variables in the X vector are those we believe unlikely to be affected by the programme. Crucially, these characteristics are not outcomes that are expected to change as a result of participation in the programme. 5 We use location (department) of where the respondent lives, household size, number of household members over 10 years of age who work, literacy of respondent (knowing how to read and write), literacy of their spouse, number of children <18 years old, age of respondent and marital status of respondent.
We estimate the propensity score, defined as the conditional probability of treatment given pre-participation characteristics using the logit model (Sianesi, 2004; Faltermeier & Abdulai, 2009) (Table A1 in Supplementary Material).
We use the propensity score to match CLM members (treatment group) with non-CLM members (control group) in order to establish a meaningful comparison group. The estimation uses the nearest neighbour matching algorithm without replacement that matches each participant with its closest neighbour with similar characteristics. We employ the standardised bias approach proposed by Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983) to assess the quality of matches by comparing before and after matching to check for remaining differences after conditioning on the propensity score.
Overall, we find that after matching, the covariates (characteristics) are balanced in the treatment and control groups. Results of balancing tests show improved standard bias after matching (Tables A2 and A3 in Supplementary Material). The propensity score appears to balance the treated and untreated groups well and no significant differences are found across covariates (Tables A4 and A5 in Supplementary Material). This result confirms the relevance of the propensity score matching approach. Furthermore, tests of common support and density of propensity scores (Figs. A1 and A2 in Supplementary Material) indicates that estimating the propensity score appears to balance the treated and untreated groups well.
Out of the total balanced sample of 732, we obtain a matched sample of 718 (359 treatment, 359 control) for outcome variables that are observed for all respondents, including maternal mental health and all indicators for exposure to violence. We obtain a smaller but still sizeable sample for indicators capturing child stimulation, which are only captured for women with children aged 3-5. The matched sample in this case is 328 (164 treatment, 164 control).
The matching indicators show substantial reduction in absolute bias for all the outcome variables -the mean bias in the covariates after matching lies below the 20 percent level of bias reduction suggested by (Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1985) . This indicates that the covariates were significantly balanced as a result of the propensity score matching procedure. In addition, after matching, the pseudo-R2s are fairly low, suggesting that there are no systematic differences in the distribution of covariates between the matched and unmatched groups.
However, while the PSM yields the Average Treatment Effect on the Treated i.e. the difference between the expected outcomes with and without programme participation, it is based on the strong Conditional Independence Assumption (CIA). In other words, it assumes that after controlling for a set of observable characteristics, potential outcomes are independent of the treatment status. Given that selection into the programme likely also depends on unobservable characteristics, it is not possible to fully control for bias using PSM. In our case, pre-treatment data allows for cancelling out the effect of the unobservable characteristics by calculating the differences in outcomes before and after treatment. Hence, we use the difference-in-differences (DiD) approach to con-trol for bias associated with observable and unobservable timeinvariant characteristics.
Thus, with the new matched sample, we estimate the treatment effect following the standard linear regression specification for DiD:
where Y is the outcome, T is the treatment (i.e. participation in the programme), t is the time trend that is common to the control and treatment groups, and x is the wealth index (to control for significant differences in wealth between treatment and control). b captures the treatment group specific effect (to account for average permanent differences between treatment and control); c captures the effect of the time trend; and d is the true effect of treatment i.e. treatment effect. This estimation allows us to control for all observable and unobservable time-invariant variables that influence programme participation and the outcome (Duncan et al., 1998; Smith & Todd, 2005) . We estimate the treatment effect using a generalized least squares (GLS) regression model for continuous outcomes and a logit model for binary outcome variables. We report results with robust and clustered standard errors by communities to account for the possibility that behaviour for psychological risk factors as affected by programme participation could be correlated within communities. Additionally, we run alternate specifications to test the robustness of our results, exploring possible differences using an alternate matching technique. By combining the two methodologies, PSM-DiD yields the Treatment Effect (Smith & Todd, 2005) , allowing us to control for both observed time variant and unobserved time-invariant heterogeneity between groups, and, to correct for any observable preexisting difference by using only the matched sample with similar characteristics (common support).
Qualitative data collection centred on 24 case studies of CLM members, allowing for insight into mechanisms that led to or hampered programme impact. Case studies were purposively selected based on age, spousal relationships and progress in the programme in order to ensure a degree of heterogeneity in the sample (Table 5 ). On average, women included in the qualitative sample are slightly younger (27.4 years of age) than those in the quantitative sample (30.2 years of age), have the same number of children under the age of five (1.7) and slightly fewer children under the age of 18 (2.7 compared to 3.2). Additional data was collected through 30 focus group discussions (FGDs) with CLM members and their family members, and community members, and seven key informant interviews (KIIs) and group conversations with CLM staff (Table 6 ). Data collection was grounded in participatory approaches and a wide range of fieldwork activities was undertaken to elicit views, opinions and experiences across respondent groups. These include family mapping, daily activity clock, body map, programme component scoring and community mapping exercises at individual and group levels respectively. In total, the qualitative data includes 215 respondents.
All activities were transcribed in Haitian Creole, and all transcripts were subsequently translated from Haitian Creole to English. A coding structure was developed based on the study's conceptual framework and after first reading of transcripts, allowing for deductive and inductive thematic analysis. All transcripts were coded using NVivo software.
We discuss findings for each psychosocial factor in turn. 5 In our case, this limits the set of characteristics that can be taken into account as many variables that could explain selection into the programme are also outcomes. We acknowledge this limitation and include all other covariates that explain participation in the programme.
The CLM programme has a significant positive effect on maternal mental health. Findings in Table 7 show that the average K6 score reduced from 10.5 at baseline to 7.1 at endline for the treatment group. The control group also experienced a decline in the K6 score but not to the same extent. This translates into a treatment effect of À1.0 points.
These positive impacts also emerge from the qualitative data. In line with other research (Hjelm et al., 2017) , the availability of economic and material resources reduces poverty-induced stress. In response to the question how the CLM programme affected their body and emotions, respondents articulated a sense of peace and hope as a result of the knowledge that the programme helps to meet basic needs, crucially also for their children.
''I sometimes feel that my body is sore, but my spirit is at peace because now I have hope." ~female CLM member, 28, 2 children < 5 years old ''. . . CLM gives you a house, the woman has animals to take to graze, it gives funds to send the children to school, so she doesn't have to worry about those things anymore." ~female CLM member, 24, 2 children < 5 years old These findings tie in with highly gendered responsibilities for childcare. Women act as primary caregivers and the belief that mothers carry the primary responsibility for children's care is held by both women and men across the sample.
''When a mother has a child, she is responsible for providing them with everything" ~spouse of female CLM member, 50, 4 children < 5 years old Although the programme does not exclude male caregivers, behaviour communication with respect to feeding practices, hygiene, sanitation and care for unborn children is primarily directed at female CLM members. More implicit messaging through songs and interactions with programme staff also reinforce gendered child care responsibilities by emphasising women's central role in household management. Greater ability to live up to expectations of being a good mother may also contribute to greater maternal mental health.
The CLM programme has limited positive effects on children's exposure to violence, as presented in Table 8 .
The reported occurrence of children in the community being exposed to harsh corporal punishment either often or sometimes decreased as a result of the programme. The proportion of the treatment group reporting that children were exposed to harsh beating or corporal punishment reduced from 64.9 percent to 51.5 percent. This compares to a much smaller decrease for the control group, leading to a significant treatment effect of À11.9 percentage points.
The programme did not have an impact on children in the community being exposed to violence at home. The treatment group experienced a decrease from 42.0 percent at baseline to 37.3 percent at endline but this did not constitute a significant effect.
Although findings point to a significant treatment effect for reports of children in the community being exposed to violence outside of the home, these results should be interpreted with cau- tion. The proportion of respondents in the treatment group having observed children's exposure to violence outside the home actually increased from 55.7 percent to 59.6 percent respectively. The treatment effect results from an even larger increase in reports of children being exposed to violence outside of the home in the control group. The CLM programme does not have a significant effect on attitudes towards child disciplining practices. The large majority of respondents agreed or strongly agreed that it was okay to hit their child when they are disobedient, and this stayed largely constant across the programme period. At baseline, 98.3 percent of the treatment group indicated that they agreed or strongly agreed with hitting their child when disobedient compared to 96.7 percent at endline.
Positive effects on exposure to harsh corporal punishment and lack of impact on attitudes to child disciplining need to be considered in conjunction with the widespread use of corporal punishment. The use of physical force for correcting children's behaviour is commonplace, including slapping children, letting children kneel for a long time or beating them with belts, branches or sticks. ''. . . when a child misbehaves, you hit him so he doesn't do it anymore. If he continues you hit him again. [. . .] You hit him on the feet with a small whip because if someone comes it's not nice if he sees that the child talks badly with you." ~female CLM member with child < 5 years old, focus group discussion The CLM programme itself offered mixed messages in terms of corporal punishment as a way of disciplining children. Some CLM members and their spouses indicated that CLM staff advised them not to hit their children as this would have adverse effects on parent-child relationships. Instead, they were advised to talk to their children, but also suggested to replace beatings with letting children sit on their knees. In other cases, staff voiced the opinion that mothers slapping their child is important for encouraging good behaviour.
Have you followed any of the advice that you got from the case managers and changed your behaviour? ''Yes, I follow the advice. It used to be that when the child cried, I would spank them. Now, I call them to me and talk to them, and if there is something they need, I give it to them. [. . .] It was difficult, because out of habit, I was used to spanking them. Now I see I shouldn't do that anymore. It has been challenging, but I have changed." ~male spouse of female CLM member, 25, 2 children < 5 years old Although the programme did not reshape attitudes towards the use of physical force in correcting children's behaviour in general, interactions with programme staff may have contributed to more sparse use of physical force or less harsh punishments.
Programme staff may also have played a role in the small reduction in children's exposure to violence inside the home. Qualitative data indicates that programme staff were deemed to play an instrumental role in mediating between CLM members and their spouses in a number of cases of conflict. In those cases, both CLM members and programme staff attested to how this contributed to less tension and acrimony and resulted in greater collaboration.
''My husband can be rude at times; he has a dirty mouth; he would say ugly things; we'd get into arguments, when they give me the money, he would take the money from me; when I ask him to give me the money back, he starts to insult me; he would even hit me. I reported that to [CLM staff]; he came and spoke to him. He finally returned 1000 gourdes out of the 360 Haitian dollars (1800 gourdes) that CLM gave to me and he had borrowed 360 Haitian dollars from me. Then I had to add the rest of the money in order to buy the goat." ~female CLM member, 22, 1 child < 5 years old While these positive interventions are significant in their own right, they do not appear to contribute to reduced violence inside the home at a wider level. Continued corporal punishment as a form of disciplining children at home is likely to have hampered the programme positive's impact on violence inside the home. In other words, greater availability of income as a pathway to reduced conflict -as found in other studies -did not emerge in the quantitative or qualitative data. Findings in relation to lack of impact on violence outside of the home are couched in a context of high levels of violence in Haiti, and within our sample. Female respondents expressed concerns regarding physical violence directed at their children, including being hit or bitten by other children on the way from school to home or when left alone at home, or being beaten by other adults when out on the roads or being left in the care of others.
''I don't leave her with others because I don't want them to hit her." ~female CLM member, 36, one child < 5 years old Becoming the victim of violence was also a concern for women themselves, particularly when travelling to the market or using public transport.
''There are areas where we feel afraid when we're passing by. Those areas are full of trees and underneath the sugarcane plantation because those areas don't have houses. Because we're not accompanied by men. We don't know whether there are robbers hiding there ready to assault us." ~female CLM member with child < 5 years old, focus group discussion A household-focused programme like CLM is unlikely to affect children's exposure to violence outside of the home.
The CLM programme had no impact on child stimulation as measured by engagement with children in age bracket 3-5 (see Table 9 ). At baseline, the average number of activities undertaken with children aged 3-5 by any adult in the household is 4.6 for the treatment group and 3.4 for the control group. This increases to 5.5 and 4.3 respectively. As the number of activities undertaken with children increased slightly over time for both treatment and control group, we do not observe any programme effect.
This lack of impact is grounded in age-specific practices in terms of child stimulation and responsive caregiving, and CLM programme activities reinforcing those practices. The importance of cuddle and play was clearly articulated by female CLM members and their male spouses, and both parents see it as their role to engage with their babies and young children in that way. Being responsive to babies' needs and not letting them cry unattended was voiced as part of what constitutes a good childhood. Provision of positive care is -at least partly -premised on a notion of reciprocity, with parents expecting their children to care for them in old age.
''You cuddle him, talk to him, ask him if he's thirsty. You don't get mad with him because he has a problem. If he needs a shower, you shower him. I need to cuddle my children because when I get old, I will be the baby needing attention. If I used to treat them badly, they'll treat me badly too." ~spouse of female CLM member, 42, 1 child < 5 years old
The importance of responsive caregiving, including talking and singing to babies, is one of the health messages within the CLM programme. However, this messaging does not extend beyond early infancy. As children grow older and start to become able to assert themselves verbally, parenting practices shift towards incentivising appropriate behaviour, leaving little room for positive encouragement, stimulation or play. Disciplining is often preceded by verbal warnings but move into physical punishment if children do not obey. Punishments tend to become more severe as children grow older, with fewer warnings preceding the punishments and beatings being harder or more repetitive.
''[When a child is naughty, I] feed him and spank him, but only when I tell him to do something for me and he refuses. We talk to and cuddle kids who are 3 years old; we threaten him with small whips. When he's 5 years old, we spank him. [. . .] You need to talk to him. You will tell him if he does something wrong, you will spank him. [. . .] You need to spank him because the children understand things. After spanking him, you talk to him so he doesn't do it again." ~female CLM member with child aged 3-5, focus group discussion Another prohibiting factor in undertaking stimulating activities with children is the juggling act of combining child care and household chores. This tends to be exacerbated by participating in the programme, both as a result of participation in programme activities such as business training and as a result of engaging in income-generating activities that are promoted by the programme such as market trading. Women may leave their children in care of others but worry that their children do not receive the supervision and care that they require. Distrust of others and concern for their children's wellbeing may lead women to prefer leaving their children on their own or in care of older siblings. Both scenarios deny the opportunities for stimulating activities with children.
How do the consequences of paid work affect young children? ''When you leave your child [aged 0-2] to someone, he can be malnourished because he didn't eat well with that person. You can leave the younger child [3-5 years old] with the older one, they can eat badly, he doesn't get washed because the older one might go play and leave the younger. The older one can take bad care of the younger, he mistreats him, he hits him." ~female CLM member with child aged 0-2, focus group discussion
We conduct robustness checks to examine the robustness of our quantitative findings (see Table A6 in Supplementary Material). We estimate programme effects using an alternative matching procedure. We employ the benchmark specification to compare outcomes using Mahalanobis matching as alternative to the nearest neighbour with no replacement. Results are in line with benchmark results in terms of the direction and significance of treatment effects; treatment effects are slightly smaller or larger using this alternative matching.
Findings of this mixed methods study point to the potential for and limitations of social protection and anti-poverty interventions for improving ECD by addressing psychosocial risk factors.
In line with findings for related interventions elsewhere (Haushofer & Shapiro, 2016; Hjelm et al., 2017) , the programme improves mental health. Reductions in poverty-reduced stress coupled with greater abilities to meet children's basic needs and to live up to expectations of good motherhood can explain lower occurrence of depressive symptoms among mothers.
The programme has a modest impact on children's exposure to harsh corporal punishment but has no discernible impact on exposure to violence inside and outside of the home or attitudes to child disciplining practices. Lack of impact may be explained by violence being widespread and pervasive in everyday life and physical punishment being considered the most appropriate mechanism for child disciplining. Messaging by programme staff may play an important role in corporal punishments being less frequent or less harsh. Programme staff may also be pivotal in improving spousal relationships in some instances, although not at a scale that significantly reduces exposure to violence within the home. We do not find evidence that greater availability of economic resources is an important mediator in reduced exposure to violence, such as found in other studies (Buller et al., 2018) .
The programme does not have a positive effect on cognitive stimulation for children aged 3-5 years old. We find no discernible impact on the number of stimulating activities (e.g. singing, counting, reading) that adults undertake with their children.
In combination, results of this study call for mild enthusiasm but also caution in terms of the role of social protection and antipoverty programming in improving ECD. This holds particularly true for comprehensive interventions seeking economic and social empowerment in addressing psychosocial factors. Findings clearly show that programmes may bring to bear some positive effects but also that these are inevitably limited without integration of support that is specifically geared at tackling pernicious issues of violence and lack of cognitive stimulation. As highlighted in Richter et al. (2017) , the value of social protection may be in their potential to integrate parenting programmes that offer nurturing care. Findings regarding the positive role of messaging and interactions with programme staff support this suggestion.
This study also provides further evidence of the use of mixed methods approaches in evaluation and its value-added in making findings useful and credible for practitioners and policy makers, as has been pointed out by others in this journal (Parker et al., 2020; The Transfer Project, 2020) . The use of qualitative methods allowed for exploring mechanisms that both enhanced and prevented change, which we would not have obtained by using quantitative methods only. As such, mixed methods approaches can help to address external validity concerns as it provides insight into mechanisms underpinning observed outcomes in a given context -much in line with the tradition of 'realist evaluation' (Pawson & Tilley, 1997) -allowing for greater understandings of whether findings may be generalizable across or applicable to other contexts (Williams, 2020) .
Finally, these findings need to be framed against wider debates about the role of social protection and anti-poverty interventions. Social protection, and cash transfers in particular, have been lauded for their ability to improve people's lives across a wide spectrum of outcomes. At the same time, evidence also points to limitations of the provision of cash alone with lack of impact on outcomes such as nutritional outcomes (de Groot et al., 2017) and learning (Bastagli et al., 2019) . This lack of impact has, at least partly, played into the development of complementary interventions such as graduation programmes. Pilot interventions abound and an emerging evidence base points to the potential of combining economic transfers with additional support such as training and behaviour change communication (Roelen & Devereux, 2019; Sedlmayr, Shah, & Sulaiman, 2019) The excitement around this new wave of comprehensive interventions also comes with concerns that social protection is being overburdened with objectives and that it will suffer a backlash if positive impacts don't follow suit (Roelen et al., 2017) . Findings of this study provide testimony to the validity of such concerns. While the potential of social protection in improving early childhood development should not be underestimated, it can only work as part of a multi-sectoral and integrated response.
Notes: p-values are reported from Wald tests on the equality of means of the attrition groups across treatment and control.