Introduction
Literature review
Graduation programmes and the 'message'theory and practice
Graduation programmes and the 'message'evidence
'Terintambwe'
Graduation model programme
The 'message'
Methodology
Quantitative research component
Qualitative research component
Analytical strategy
Evaluation findings
Programme effects for programme participants
Spillover effects for control group households
Role and quality of training and coaching services
Money and the message 11
Messages cause ripple effects
Modality of messaging matters
Conclusions
Table 1 .
Table 2 .
Table 3 .
Sample size and attrition, by programme status and province (quantitative survey) = High treatment households, T2 = low treatment households, C = control group households.Source: Devereux et al. (2015)
Analytical strategy
Average treatment effects
Graduation programmes have become an increasingly popular instrument in the development toolkit and have been applauded for their success in 'graduating' people out of extreme poverty (Roelen, 2015) . Graduation programmes are based on the premise that extremely poor households require a big push to set in motion a positively reinforcing cycle of income generation and asset accumulation (Carter & Barrett, 2007) . A comprehensive mix of sequenced support therefore includes consumption transfers, asset transfers, access to savings and credit, training, and coaching (Hashemi & Umaira, 2011) . The model's underlying rationale suggests that the combination of components and their mutually reinforcing synergies lead to positive and sustainable impacts on poverty. A recent multisite evaluation indicated that graduation programmes can improve food security, assets, income, and consumption, and that impacts are sustained after the end of the programme (Banerjee et al., 2015) . Notwithstanding these positive effects, heavy resource requirements and high costs associated with the provision of comprehensive packages has raised questions about the role of individual components within the package, and their contributions to overall programme impact.
Training and coaching receive particular attention in discussions about the cost-effectiveness of individual components. They are increasingly recognised as crucial components, sometimes referred to as the 'X-factor' in graduation programming (Roelen, 2015) . This thinking is partly borne out of the evidence from programmes solely providing cash or asset transfers leading to improved direct basic needs (Bastagli et al., 2016) and productive investments (Fisher et al., 2017) but less widespread in terms of behaviour change in areas such as sanitation and nutrition (Roelen et al., 2017) . At the same time, longstanding experience with communication for development (C4D) demonstrates the powerful effects of messaging in areas of health and nutrition (Inagaki, 2007) . However, the fact that training and coaching are generally the most expensive component of graduation programmes, due to their labour intensity and human resource requirements (Banerjee et al., 2015) , puts their role under considerable scrutiny (Blattman, Green, Jamison, Lehmann, & Annan, 2016) . While the evidence base on impacts of graduation programmes at large is now steadily expanding, studies on the particular role of training and coaching remains limited.
In light of this knowledge gap and the need for more information for policy and programmatic purposes, this article investigates the role of the 'message' as part of the wider package of support in graduation programmes. It does so in reference to the Concern Worldwide Graduation Model 'Terintambwe' -Take a Step Forward -Programme in Burundi. This programme provided participants with a combination of cash transfers, asset transfers, training, and coaching from April 2013 to April 2015. We demonstrate the importance of training and coaching, arguing that the combination of money and the message make programmes powerful in affecting positive change. In doing so this paper also highlights the value of adopting mixed-methods approaches for learning lessons of programme effects and their underlying dynamics, which cannot be obtained through the use of quantitative or qualitative methods alone.
The remainder of the article is structured as follows: firstly, we provide an overview of the theory and practice underpinning graduation programmes as well as an indicative review of evidence. Secondly, we present the programme in Burundi. Next we discuss the methodology and analytical strategy before presenting findings on programme effects. We subsequently reflect on these findings aiming to unpack the role of the 'message'. Finally, we conclude with wider reflections on research and programming.
Graduation programmes originated in Bangladesh in the early 2000s following the observation that extremely poor households were reluctant to participate in microfinance programmes, because they perceived the risk of taking loans as too high. In response, Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee (BRAC) decided to reach such 'ultra-poor' households with a comprehensive and carefully sequenced package of support that would lift them out of extreme poverty, to a level where they would be better able to join microfinance groups with confidence. The first 'graduation model' programme was called Challenging the Frontiers of Poverty Reduction -Targeting the Ultra-Poor (CFPR-TUP) and was launched in 2002 (Hashemi & Umaira, 2011) . Its package of support includes material and nonmaterial components.
The first element of the material component consists of regular unconditional cash transfers. These cash transfers perform several functions, including financing basic consumption needs but also moderate emergency cash needs such as unpredictable healthcare expenses. The second element is a productive asset for generating a stream of future income, even after participants leave the programme. The asset is often livestocka large animal such as a cow, or small stock such as goats or poultrywhich generates income from animal products (milk, eggs) or sales of offspring. Thirdly, participants are encouraged or required to save a portion of their cash transfers or earnings, building a small pot that can be drawn down for emergency cash needs or to invest in livelihood activities.
Non-material support is also provided, in two related forms. Firstly, participants receive training in livelihood activities, usually related to the asset transfer they received (for example, how to rear livestock), but also broader income-generating skills such as business planning and financial literacy. Secondly, participants receive coaching and mentoring in a range of skills, including 'behaviour change communication' (BCC) on issues such as hygiene and sanitation, gender-based violence, and nutritious diets. A key feature of BRAC's pioneering approach is that case managers visit each participating household frequently, often every week. This level of personal attention allows participants to receive tailored solutions to the livelihood challenges they face, and is also believed to instil self-confidence that is ultimately empowering (McIlvaine, Oser, Lindsey, & Blume, 2015) .
After the CFPR-TUP showed early signs of success, the graduation model was applied elsewhere in Bangladesh, namely the Chars Livelihoods Programme (CLP) (Pritchard, Kenward, & Hannan, 2015) and the Economic Empowerment of the Poorest (EEP)/Shiree programme (Risner & Gadhavi, 2015) . In order to test the replicability of the model outside Bangladesh, the Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP) and Ford Foundation financed pilot projects in six countries -Ethiopia, Ghana, Honduras, India, Pakistan, and Peru. These projects also included 'high-frequency home visits' by case managers throughout the duration of the programme, which comprised training related to incomegenerating activities, coaching in life-skills, and mentoring (Banerjee et al., 2015) . Concern Worldwide started running graduation pilot projects independently in Burundi and Rwanda from 2012 onwards. The Terintambwe programme in Burundi is discussed later in this article.
There is robust evidence that the package of support provided by graduation programmes generates significant positive impacts on participating households.
Evaluations of programmes in Bangladesh found that it successfully graduated a high proportion of participants out of extreme income poverty, not only during the programme period but also afterwards. At the start of the CFPR-TUP programme in 2002, 85 per cent of participants were surviving below the extreme poverty line. By the end of the programme cycle in 2005, this figure had fallen to 53 per cent, and in 2008, three years after they left the programme, only 8 per cent of households remained below the extreme poverty line (Hashemi & Umaira, 2011) . A more recent evaluation found that real per capita incomes were 42 per cent higher than at baseline, two years after participants left the programme (Samson, 2015) . With respect to the Chars Livelihoods Programme, 85 per cent of participating households were found to have graduated at the end of the programme (Pritchard et al., 2015) .
Positive effects of graduation programmes were also found elsewhere. Impact evaluations of the pilot projects in Ethiopia, Ghana, Honduras, India, Pakistan, and Peru covering a total of 10,495 participants provide evidence for positive and sustained impacts (Banerjee et al., 2015) . Household consumption, assets, and food security increased as a result of the projects in all countries (except Peru) and were retained or improved in the year after the programme had come to an end. Improvements were also recorded between baseline and endline for several non-economic indicators, including physical and mental health, political involvement, and women's empowerment. However, these non-economic gains dissipated after participants left the project, and were no longer significant by the time of the follow-up surveys (Banerjee et al., 2015) .
Other studies of programmes combining material support with training and coaching also demonstrate positive impacts of comprehensive packages of support. An evaluation of the Youth Opportunities Programme (YOP) in Uganda finds that the provision of cash transfers coupled with skills training and support for business planning significantly and persistently increases investments, work, and income compared to those without support (Blattman, Fiala, & Martinez, 2014) . Impacts are particularly strong for women (Blattman et al., 2014) . This resonates with findings from a review of evaluations of women's economic empowerment programmes, concluding that intense packages of support are particularly important for very poor women to grow their businesses (Buvinić & Furst-Nichols, 2014) . Indeed, another study in Uganda found high returns to micro-enterprise support targeted at extremely poor and war-affected women; a combination of a cash grant, business skills training, and supervision led to a doubling of microenterprise ownership and incomes (Blattman et al., 2016) .
Studies specifically assessing the impact of the training and coaching component are limited, but tend to support the view that training and coaching have intrinsic value and reinforce the benefits provided by other components such as cash transfers. An evaluation of the Transfer Modality Research Initiative (TMRI) programme in Bangladesh finds that BCC significantly increases the impact on children's nutritional outcomes (Ahmed et al., 2016) . A recent study of Money and the message 3 the CFPR-TUP points towards positive spillovers and nutrition impacts for non-participants living in communities where the programme is implemented. Poor non-participants in treatment communities adopted healthy behaviours, including exclusive breastfeeding, vitamin A supplementation, diversifying diets, and handwashing, and experienced positive changes in nutritional status as a result of the programme compared to poor non-participants in communities where the programme is not present (Raza & Van de Poel, 2016) . An experiment in Liberia with men previously involved in criminal activities highlights how intense counselling (in the form of cognitive behavioural therapy) can improve sustainability of impacts. Engagement in crime and violence were reduced among all men receiving either cash alone, counselling alone, or cash and counselling combined, but these positive effects were only maintained after the end of the intervention for those having received the combination of support (Blattman, Jamison, & Sheridan, 2017) .
The 'Graduation Model Programme' in Burundi, also known as Terintambwe, was launched by NGO Concern Worldwide in two provinces of Burundi, Cibitoke and Kirundo, in April 2013. The programme targets the functionally landless but who are capable of work and aims to provide them with sustainable pathways out of extreme poverty.
The Concern Worldwide 'Graduation Model Programme' draws on positive experiences with programmes in Bangladesh and elsewhere, offering a similar package of sequenced support over a period of two years. As with BRAC's CFPR-TUP in Bangladesh, the Terintambwe programme in Burundi consisted of the following elements:
(1) Targeting the poorest households: Community committees were asked to select 2600 potential participants based on the following criteria: (i) households are landless, (ii) the main occupation is daily occasional labour, and (iii) households are permanent residents or displaced people, with an indication that they will stay in the area for the duration of the programme. Particularly vulnerable households such as female-headed households, Batwa 1 families, HIV and AIDS affected, and youth-headed households (aged 15-24) were prioritised. The lists of selected households were verified by fieldworkers. (2) Income support: All participants received 14 monthly cash transfers of 24,500 BiF (approximately 15 USD), or 343,000 BiF (approximately 200 USD) in total, during the first year of programme implementation. The cash was distributed through the post office using mobile phones. Each participant was given a mobile phone and received a message every month indicating that their transfer had been paid into their account. They would then collect their transfer from the post office. (3) Asset transfers: All participants received working capital of 150,000 BiF (approximately 90 USD) for income-generating activities (IGAs), rather than direct asset transfers. Participants were asked to select an IGA from six options suggested by Concern (based on a market and valuechain analysis) and to write a business plan outlining the amount of working capital required and how it would be used. The capital was transferred in three instalments. (4) Access to savings facilities: All participants received training in financial literacy and were encouraged to join a Savings and Lending Community (SILC). Almost all participants were members of a SILC by the end of the programme. (5) Skills training and coaching: Participants received training and coaching on a wide range of issues, including use of mobile phones, IGAs, HIV/AIDS, hygiene, nutrition, adult literacy, and gender equity. We can consider this component to be the 'message' as alluded to in the title of this article.
The programme was essentially implemented in two phases. The first 12 months (phase 1) consisted of income support, training and coaching, and the establishment of SILCs to promote savings. During the subsequent 12 months (phase 2), participants received their working capital in three separate instalments (as outlined in their business plans), were actively engaged in SILCs, and continued to receive training and coaching services.
The 'message' can be considered to consist of two sub-components: (i) skills training and (ii) coaching and support services. While skills training consisted of more generic training sessions provided at community level and attended by all participants at the same time, coaching and support services represented tailored coaching and mentoring provided through home visits by case managers on a household-by-household basis.
Training sessions in the Terintambwe programme took place two to four times per month in the first year of implementation (phase 1) and were reduced to one to two times per month during the second year (phase 2). They covered a wide range of topics, including literacy, health, hygiene, disaster risk reduction, and business training. They were undertaken at colline (village) level and were provided by case managers or skilled trainers from other organisations.
Coaching and support services were provided by case managers. The programme employed 45 case managers, averaging a case load of 44 households per case manager. Home visits were the main modality for providing tailored support to participant households, following up on people's understandings of the generic trainings, discussing their business plans and consulting on specific issues affecting the participant, household and its members. Services were diversified between 'high' and 'low' treatment groups: high treatment (T1) participants received three visits a month while low treatment (T2) participants received one visit a month. It should be noted that these differences were not always upheld in practice as case managers struggled to refuse support to low treatment participants as they were visiting the high treatment participants in the same communities. All programme participants received the same set of trainings.
This article employs a unique mixed methods approach, combining quantitative data from evaluation and monitoring surveys with qualitative and participatory data. When used in isolation, quantitative and qualitative methods can only provide limited information about programme impacts, undermining internal and external validity of findings (Samson et al., 2015) . In terms of studying the effects of social protection and other poverty reduction programmes, the use of mixed methods approaches are crucial to understanding dynamics underpinning impacts (or lack thereof) both within and outside the programmes' theories of change (Devereux et al., 2013; Roelen & Devereux, 2014) . This proves particularly pertinent for this study, whereby the combination of data and methods allows for studying the permeability of training and coaching in relation to programme participants and beyond.
The research was undertaken with ethical approval from the Institute of Development Studies (IDS) Ethics Review Committee.
A total of 2600 households in Cibitoke and Kirundo provinces were pre-selected for potential participation in the Terintambwe programme and randomly assigned to a high treatment group (T1 = 1000), a low treatment group (T2 = 1000) or a control group (C = 600 households) with equal split across provinces. Sizes for the respective groups were decided to ensure maximal explanatory power within programmatic boundaries. Randomisation was undertaken at colline Money and the message 5 (village) level; in each of the participating collines, households were randomly allocated to treatment or control groups. This process was undertaken by Concern Worldwide and facilitated by community committees who discussed the randomisation process and its outcomes with households in treatment and control groups respectively.
Quantitative data collection included two components. The first component consisted of surveys that were administered for all households in the treatment and control groups at three points in time. The baseline survey was undertaken in November-December 2012, before the start of the programme; the midline survey took place in June 2014, after the cash transfers component ended and before the asset transfer component started; and the endline survey was administered in April 2015 after all asset transfers had been made and most training had been completed. The surveys focused on the collection of information for 31 'key outcome indicators' covering living conditions, food security, assets, hygiene, health, and social capital, among others.
Attrition over time is limited: 3.5 per cent from baseline to midline; 7 per cent from midline to endline and 8.6 per cent from baseline to endline (see Table 1 ). Overall attrition is slightly higher in Kirundo and for control group households. Attrition occurred fairly equally across all outcome variables apart from house ownership: attrition is significantly higher among households not owning their house than among households that do own their house. As house ownership is commonly associated with higher wealth, and because people who don't own their house are more likely to migrate, estimates may therefore be biased upwards.
The second component of quantitative data collection consisted of monitoring surveys. They were administered among all participant households at regular intervals during the programme period. A total of nine surveys were undertaken from August 2013 to January 2015. Survey questions focused on programme processes and uptake, including receipt and use of cash and asset transfers, participation in SILCs, and frequency and content of training sessions.
Two rounds of qualitative data collection were undertaken as part of the evaluation: (1) round I took place in May-June 2013 after the first few months of programme implementation, (2) round II was undertaken in February-April 2015 after the completion of all asset transfers/working capital payments and towards the end of the programme. Additional data collection took place as part of a separate study on child wellbeing in January-February 2015.
A combination of different methods was used in the collection of qualitative data, including key informant interviews (KIIs), focus group discussions (FGDs), and household case studies (CSs). Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) exercises were integrated throughout the process of data collection, including community mappings and life history diagrams. The qualitative research included programme staff, programme participants from the high-treatment group (T1) and low-treatment group (T2), and non-participants from the control group. While the first round of data collection focused strongly on targeting and programme implementation processes, the second round of data collection focused on factors that could explain programme impact.
In total, 36 KIIs were undertaken with programme staff at colline and province levels, and 60 FGDs and 60 CSs were undertaken with participants and non-participants at colline level. The FGDs and CSs were stratified by treatment group and gender. The evaluation data was supplemented with data collection on child wellbeing with four KIIs with programme staff, 12 FGDs, and eight CSs with programme participants. FGDs were stratified by gender but included respondents across both treatment groups. A detailed overview of data collection exercises can be found in Table A1 in the Appendix.
Social desirability bias is a concern in qualitative research, particularly in relation to evaluation of service when service provision is still ongoing. We sought to minimise such bias in a number of ways: firstly, data was collected by an independent research partner who also introduced themselves to the Money and the message 7 respondents as being independent from the implementing NGO. Secondly, individual researchers were well trained, highly experienced, and well versed in the local language in order to build rapport with the respondents and probe for in-depth answers. Thirdly, during the process of seeking informed consent, it was explained to respondents that their responseseither positive or negativehad no bearing on their current or future support from the implementing NGO or other organisations. Finally, discussions and interviews were held without the presence of staff or case managers from the implementing agency present or within earshot.
The study's mixed methods approach and research design provide unique opportunities for the investigation of the role of training and coaching, specifically in relation to spillover effects. The sample of this study is based on random allocation of households at colline level to treatment and control groups (as opposed to random allocation of collines). This strategy maximises the degree of heterogeneity within each of the three groups, thereby reducing the risk of a design effect. 2 At the same time it increases the risk of spillover effects, thereby 'contaminating' the control group. Such effects make it more difficult to attribute changes in outcomes to the programme as they would also be observed for the control group. At the time of programme and evaluation design, the risk of spillovers was deemed to be low due to the relatively small size of the income support and the geographical spread of households across the colline. However, findings from the quantitative survey data and qualitative data do point towards considerable spillover between groups. While spillover effects are undesirable in terms of isolating treatment effects, the mix of diverse data and methods allowed for investigating the spread of programme effects beyond the immediate target group in a unique manner. The investigation would not have been possible had a single data source been employed.
The range of data are combined in an analytical strategy (see Table 2 ) to make best use of their respective strengths and complementarities. Evaluation survey data is used for standard difference-indifferences (d-i-d) 3 modelling to estimate treatment effects, and for non-parametric analysis to consider spillover to control group households. Monitoring survey data and qualitative data serve to unpack and understand treatment effects and changes for the control group.
It is important to note that results presented in this article evaluate outcomes or programme effects rather than impacts. Firstly, changes are assessed immediately at the end of the programme. A true assessment of programme impacts should consider whether changes are sustained over time, starting from one year after programme end (as in Banerjee et al., 2015) but ideally tracking impacts across a generation to assess 'intergenerational graduation' (Roelen, 2015) . Secondly, we rely on behavioural indicatorshandwashing and number of meals consumed per dayto draw inferences about changes in health, nutrition, and other outcomes. While they might serve as appropriate proxies, conclusions about the real impact of graduation programmes' on individuals' nutrition and health status require
We present findings for (i) overall programme effects, (ii) spillover effects, and (iii) the role and quality of training and coaching services, that is the 'message'.
Table 3 provides treatment effects for selected indicators across a range of outcomes, presenting estimates for attributable programme effects from baseline to midline, midline to endline, and from Money and the message 9 baseline to endline for high treatment (T1) and low treatment (T2). It also includes a significance test indicating whether the effects for T1 and T2 are significantly different. Estimates demonstrate programme effects on treatment households in comparison to control households. Programme effects from baseline to endline are significant and large across the board, with the exception of behavioural indicators regarding HIV/AIDS and family planning. Considering living conditions and hygiene, for example, average treatment effects from baseline to endline show a 42 and 44 percentage point reduction in the proportion of households living with a seriously leaking roof and a 36 to 40 percentage point increase in the proportion of households with members washing their hands with soap after toileting. Most of this change occurs from baseline to midline; treatment effects from midline to endline are significant for less than half of the indicators. 4 These findings are mirrored in the larger set of key outcome indicators.
Differences between treatment effects for T1 and T2 are not significant. This finding holds across the set of key outcome indicators; households that are part of the high treatment group are not found to have performed significantly better than households that are part of the low-treatment group. Potential explanations for this include: (i) too little differentiation between high and low treatment households in terms of the number of visits that they received, (ii) sharing of informationspilloverbetween T1 and T2 treatment households, and (iii) practical constraints to maintaining differential treatment of participant households in the same community.
Figure 1 presents trend diagrams underpinning the treatment effect estimates provided in Table 3 . With the exception of social capital, we observe changes for the control group that are in line with those of the treatment groups. Changes are most prominent in the areas of hygiene and assets.
Qualitative data suggests that NGOs or government services have not played a meaningful role in the communities included in the programme, suggesting that improvements among the control group are a result of spillover rather than contamination. This is confirmed by direct quotes such as: Control groups are on standby as they are expecting to be the next beneficiaries of Concern's programmes. They therefore often ask beneficiaries about what they learned and they try to apply it as well although they often have financial issues that prevent them from implementing the changes. (case manager, Kirundo) It should be noted that control group members received hoes and solar lamps as compensation for participation in surveys. The value of these assets is low but may have contributed to productive activities among the control group, potentially leading to an underestimation of programme effects.
Qualitative data and monitoring survey data provide insights into the role of training and coaching. As part of the qualitative data collection on child wellbeing, programme participants were asked about which component of the programme they felt was most important in improving children's lives. The material components of the programmenotably the cash transfers, assets transfers, and also participation in the SILCswere deemed crucial for improving children's wellbeing: 'Asset transfers constitute the most important component of the programme that is helping me to ameliorate my children's lives; my IGA contributes to increase the family income' (female T1 participant, Mabayi, Cibitoke).
Many also highlighted the synergetic effects of material support, training and coaching services. Female participants pointed out that: '[. . .] trainings enabled me to acquire knowledge on diverse topics and cash transfers helped me to purchase what we needed to improve our living standards' (female T1 participant, Mabayi, Cibitoke) and 'Coaching sessions were the most important as they taught us ways to improve our living conditions and money came to help us put it into practice' (female T1 participant, Nyabikenke, Kirundo).
0 20 40 60 80 % of households Baseline Midline Endline 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 2.2 2.4 Baseline Midline Endline 100000 200000 300000 400000 Baseline Midline Endline 20 40 60 80 100 % of households Baseline Midline Endline 20 40 60 80 % of households Baseline Midline Endline 10 20 30 40 50 % of households Baseline Midline Endline Control T1 T2 5 10 15 20 % of households Baseline Midline Endline 15 20 25 30 35 40 % of households Baseline Midline Endline
Figure 1 . Programme effects by treatment group. Source: Authors' compilation from Devereux et al. (2015) .
One respondent also pointed out that children directly benefited from the advice provided by case managers during home visits: 'When the case manager visits us at home, children are also present to listen to advice we are given. Especially in regards to hygiene, which they also put it into practice' (female T2 participant, Bugabira, Cibitoke).
Male participants also indicated the importance of training in combination with material support in promoting children's outcomes, but rather in terms of optimising the business opportunities for earning income as opposed to benefiting children directly: Trainings were critical as they have equipped us with useful skills that helped us improve our lives. If we were given money without the knowledge we would have wasted it. We therefore used the cash and asset transfers to respond to our children's needs. Additionally, coaching services provided us guidance on how to use/invest productively money we had in order to increase the family income. (male T2 participant, Mabayi, Cibitoke)
Participants deemed the quality of training sessions to be high, as demonstrated by answers to questions regarding trainings received throughout the programme period. Programme participants indicated: 'It would be better if we were provided with more training sessions; they are very useful' (male T1 participant, Nyabikenke, Kirundo) and 'Concern should insist on providing more trainings as it enables participants to gain knowledge on a diversity of things' (male T1 participant, Kagege, Kirundo).
Figure 2 presents participants' perceptions regarding aims and objectives, relevance, and the clarity of the information of training sessions as collected through the monitoring survey at five to six month intervals. Answers are consistently positive with a peak in September 2014. At that time, three out of
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
August 2013 February 2014 September 2014 January 2015 August 2013 February 2014 September 2014 January 2015 August 2013 February 2014 September 2014 January 2015 How clear were the aims and objectives of the training? How well did you understand the information provided? How relevant was the training for you? % ++ + +/----Figure 2. Participants' perceptions of the first training they received, August 2013-January 2015. Notes: The legend is included at the bottom of the figure. ++ denotes 'very clear', 'very well, 'very relevant' respectively; + respectively denotes 'clear', 'well', 'relevant' respectively; ± denotes 'average'; -denotes 'somewhat unclear', 'not well', 'not relevant' respectively;denotes 'very unclear', 'not at all', 'not at all relevant'. Source: Authors' compilation from monitoring survey data.
The shift in focus towards income generating activities was not limited to trainings but also extended to home visits: 'Before the content of the visit was more related to sanitation and hygiene but now the case manager asks us about our businesses' (female T1 participant, Bugabira, Cibitoke) and 'The purpose of the visits changed. During cash transfers, the discussion focused on how we use [. . .] money that we were receiving monthly, but today we discuss more about IGAs and how that activity is evolving' (male T2 participant, Sigu, Kirundo).
The shift in focus from phase 1 to phase 2 seems to be reflected in outcomes that are more directly related to behaviour (as opposed to income). Behavioural issues that received less attention or that were mostly covered during phase 1 of programme implementation showed little improvement from midline to endline, such as hygiene and knowledge of HIV/AIDS. Findings (see Table 3 and Figure 1 ) show that use of measures preventing HIV/AIDS completely levelled off from midline to endline and that positive attitudes towards people living with HIV/AIDS had deteriorated from midline to endline. The use of contraceptives almost dropped back down to baseline values (see Figure 1 ).
The need for continued messaging to sustain change was also reflected in concerns voiced directly by programme participants. In response to the question 'What will you miss most when the case managers stop visiting you?', one female participant said: 'The case manager's advices were very useful to myself and my husband and I am afraid that if the visits stops we may go backward' (female T2 participant, Kagege, Kirundo).
These findings about the role of messaging as a cause or catalyst of positive change are in line with the evidence highlighted in Section 2.2 and reinforce the current narrative in graduation programming regarding the important role of training, coaching, and support in achieving positive change.
Qualitative findings support the explanation that positive changes for the control group are a result of positive externalities of the programme, and particularly linked to the component of training and coaching. Qualitative data provides little evidence for contamination following support from external parties such as government or NGOs is limited at most, suggesting that changes for control group members are a result of programme spillovers. As indicated in Section 4.3, the randomisation strategy for the evaluation design led to too little separation between treatment and control households in terms of geographical proximity. This allowed spillovers to dilute estimated treatment effects, but helped to spread effects wider and beyond direct participants.
Qualitative findings strongly suggest that training and coaching were most important in leading to spillover effects. Multiplier effects following material improvements were only mentioned once: 'My sister is a beneficiary of the programme and she received a solar panel and she charges my phone for free' (male control group member, Mubayi, Cibitoke). Most respondents also indicated informal sharing and redistribution mechanisms at community level to have stayed the same: 'Households have continued to help each other like before Terintambwe started' (control group member, Kagege, Kirundo).
Spillover effects from training and coaching services occurred through three mechanisms: (i) direct exposurethrough interactions with case managers, (ii) as a result of sharing between participants and non-participants, and (iii) as a result of the 'demonstration effect' with control group members copying participants.
Although case managers were not supposed to provide coaching and support services to control group or other community members, this rigid separation of efforts proved difficult to uphold in practice. As indicated by case managers: 'I do not provide coaching services to non-beneficiaries or control group households per se but when they ask me questions I reply to them and give them advice sometimes' (case manager, Kirundo) and 'It also happens when I sometimes pass by a house and notice that the latrine is dirty or not well built, I can tell them how to improve on sanitation. Generally, they often ask me questions that I answer' (case manager, Cibitoke). Supervisors also indicated that while case managers are not supposed to be proactive, they provide advice when asked: 'When asked a question, the case manager can answer to it regardless of who asks it but s/he cannot take the initiative to provide coaching services to anyone else who is not a T1 beneficiary' (supervisor, Cibitoke).
Case managers and control group members also provided testimony to spillover effects: 'I started thinking about doing sharecropping after having talked to a Terintambwe participant' (female control group member, Mabayi, Cibitoke), 'I have learned good hygiene practices from Terintambwe participants' (control group members, Sigu, Kirundo) and 'T1 and T2 beneficiaries are friends and neighbours and so it is normal that they share information (case manager, Mabayi, Cibitoke).
The existence of a demonstration effect due to observing participants' behaviours became evident from responses by case managers and participants: 'Control group members imitate Terintambwe participants' (case manager Mugina, Cibitoke) and 'Some of my neighbours have also imitated me in building latrines' (male T1 participant, Nyabikenke, Kirundo).
Qualitative data also provides evidence for the John Henry effect, that is control group members working extra hard to 'catch up' with the treatment group due to being aware of their control group status in a social experiment. As indicated by case managers: '[. . .] T2 participants try to do better to show that even though they are not being visited as much as T1 beneficiaries, they can perform better than their peers' (case manager, Mabayi, Cibitoke) and Control group households also live close to T1 and T2 beneficiaries and they try their best to imitate T1 and T2 so that they resemble to them (they wash their clothes so that they also stand in public as beneficiaries do for instance) even though they are not part of the programme. (case manager, Nyabikenke, Kirundo) This effect limits the extent of the spillover effect, but was not alluded to by programme participants and control group members themselves.
These findings are in line with evidence from other contexts showing that interventions with a combination of cash and services can lead to improvements in lives of non-participants, such as for the CFPR-TUP in Bangladesh (Raza & Van de Poel, 2016) and the PROGRESA conditional cash transfer (CCT) programme in Mexico (Handa, Huerta, Perez, & Straffon, 2001) . Information about pathways to spillover is limited however, leaving questions as to whether positive effects for non-participants are a result of economic multipliers, demonstration effects, or sharing of information. These findings begin to fill this knowledge gap.
Findings also suggest that the way in which trainings and coaching support services were provided was important in affecting change, both for programme participants and control group members. Monitoring survey data indicates that trainings were clear and relevant (see Figure 2 ) while qualitative data provides evidence for participants' positive opinions about the value of training and support from case managers. Case managers were recruited locally and had varying educational and professional backgrounds, ranging from advanced degrees in education and psychology and some work experience to a secondary school degree and no work experience (Devereux & Roelen, 2013) . After starting their jobs with Concern, case managers received between four and six trainings about the programme, payment mechanisms, data collection, and grievance mechanisms, among others (Devereux & Roelen, 2013) .
In response to the question: 'What will you miss most when the case manager stops visiting you at the end of the programme?', one participant responded: 'We will miss her pleasant company as well as her coaching' (male T2 participant, Mugina, Cibitoke). Most respondents indicated feeling confident about the future as a result of constructive advice: 'We will miss her constructive advice but we had gained knowledge that we will use when she will stop visiting us' (female T1 participant). Others expressed concern about the future in absence of the case managers' support in handling power dynamics at the household and community level: 'We will continue to do well however we will miss his help regarding keeping together our couples. Indeed, men on this colline listen more to case managers than they do for chiefs of colline whenever tensions arise' (female T1 participant, Sigu, Kirundo).
Findings also allude to the particular benefit of tailored coaching and home visits over and above standardised trainings. This mostly pertains to responding to more personal issues, such as resolving Money and the message 15 household conflicts, intervening in cases of alcohol abuse and advising on family planning: 'I learned about the importance to know my HIV status and I learned more about family planning methods' (female T2 participant, Mabayi, Cibitoke) and 'The case manager's advice has helped to save my marriage. I used to fight a lot with my spouse but not anymore' (male T1 participant, Bugabira, Cibitoke).
Case managers' positive reinforcement during the testing times of setting up a business were also considered important: 'Coaching the case manager provided me in regards to improving my business encouraged me to not give up on my IGA because it was becoming hard to run a business of bananas. I persevered until the activity became profitable' (male T1 participant, Kagege, Kirundo) and 'I had started to sell taro but the business failed; the case manager advised me to change to flour business and it is more successful' (male T2 participant, Sigu, Kirundo).
The significant role of case managers in providing tailored support and the importance thereof in making the programme successful is mirrored by responses from case managers themselves in response to questions about difficulties with implementing home visits. As a case manager from Cibitoke explains: There are some beneficiaries who are very difficult to manage. [. . .] For instance, I have a woman beneficiary who has a drinking problem. We decided to give her BIF 20,000 as the first tranche for the asset transfer to see whether she will undertake an IGA or not, and she did not. When I went to visit her for DDG training, I find out she spent her money on alcohol. I am still trying to find a way to overcome that challenge. Another issue is that some T2 beneficiaries do not repay loans correctly and since I do not coach them at home it is hard to reach them out. [case manager, Cibitoke]
The importance of intensive support and interpersonal communication (IPC) through face-to-face interactions with and home visits by frontline workers has been found vital in other approaches seeking positive impacts through behaviour change. Alive & Thrive's multi-layered Social and Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC) programme aiming to improve infant and young child feeding (IYCF) practices was found to significantly improve levels of exclusive breastfeeding and dietary diversity for children in Ethiopia (Kim et al., 2016) . Experiments in Bangladesh and Vietnam seeking to understand the effects of differential degrees of intensity found programmes to be significantly more effective in promoting exclusive breastfeeding when combining intensive IPC with mass media and community mobilisation compared to a combination of less intensive IPC without other interventions (Menon et al., 2016) .
This article sought to assess the role of training and coaching in graduation programming and affecting positive change. Using multiple data and methods, we show that: (1) training and coaching within the wider graduation model approach lead to and galvanise change, (2) benefits of training and coaching stretch beyond the immediate target group and extend to non-participants, and (3) intensive, tailored, and interpersonal forms of communication are imperative for messaging to have positive effects.
These findings point towards valuable lessons for the role of the 'message' in integrated packages of support. Firstly, there is no doubt that training and coachingthe 'message'form an indispensable component to achieve positive change for programme participants. The combination of quantitative estimates and descriptive data, and qualitative assessment of perceptions and experiences provide testimony to the powerful role of training and coaching within the comprehensive package of income support, asset transfers, and access to savings and credit. Secondly, the pervasive nature of messaging means that it can translate into valuable benefits for non-participants and the wider community, supporting its use for wider developmental goals beyond strengthening livelihoods and improving living conditions of the extremely poor.
From a methodological perspective, this article demonstrates the power of mixing data and methods as it allowed for studying the pervasiveness of training and coaching. The combination of quantitative and qualitative data allowed for the investigation of spillover effects between high and low treatment and control group members and the effects of the 'message' on those beyond direct programme participants in ways that would not have been possible had the study been premised on a single method and data source.
The analysis in this article highlights the potential for community-wide impacts, particularly in settings with high population density and community cohesion. It also suggests that multi-layering, intensity, repetition, and the interpersonal nature of messaging is crucial. What these findings are not able to do, however, is to suggest what level of training and coaching is necessary to achieve desirable and cost-effective levels of change. The number and types of training sessions were the same for all programme participants. With respect to coaching, high treatment participants received three visits per month and low treatment participants received one visit per month. Project effects were not significantly different between these groups, indicating that treatment intensity in terms of numbers of home visits does not matter. However, spillover effects between high and low treatment participants as well as the fact that the differential between high and low treatment had not always been upheld in practice undermines the ability to extrapolate this finding to other contexts.
Questions about cost-effectiveness and criteria for success in graduation model programming coupled with longstanding experiences with C4D, BCC, and training in other sectors such as health and nutrition highlights the need for cross-sector learning. Tapping into and building on the expertise in these sectors will be imperative to further the development of graduation programming while at the same time prevent a reinvention of the wheel. Questions for consideration include whether a low frequency of high-quality tailored interactions can be equally or more powerful than a high-frequency of standardised interactions, and whether community 'champions' can play a role in reinforcing the message and sustaining the message. Questions also remain about whether the graduation model is scalable to national level, or whether its success is due to the unique ability that grassroots NGOs have to operate intensively at household-level, especially for coaching and messaging.
processes (including role of the 'message) Qualitative data Organisation and categorisation Analysis of pathways and spillover effects (including role of the 'message') 8 K. Roelen & S. Devereux direct collection of data on those outcomes. We therefore refer to programme effects throughout the paper.
Notes: *, ** and *** indicate significance at 10 per cent, 5 per cent, and 1 per cent respectively; ns denotes that the differences between treatment effects for T1 and T2 are not significant. Source: Authors' compilation from Devereux et al. (2015)
.
K.Roelen & S. Devereux