INTRODUCTION
Organization of the Paper
DESCRIPTION OF THE CFPR-TUP PROGRAMME
METHOD
Evaluation Design
Data Collection
Ultra Poor and Asset Transfer in Urban Setting
Analytical Technique
Construction of Women Empowerment and Social Awareness Indices
RESULT AND DISCUSSION
Employment Status of the Working Aged (15-65 Years) Males and Females
Per Capita Income, Asset Holding and Financial Market Participation
Ultra Poor and Asset Transfer in Urban Setting
Food Consumption, Calorie Intake and Food Expenditure
Ultra Poor and Asset Transfer in Urban Setting
Issues Related to Health, Basic Facilities and Hygiene
Health
Basic facilities, sanitation and hygiene practices
Impact on Empowerment and Social Awareness
CONCLUSION
REFERENCE
Table 1 .
Table 3 .
Table 5 .
Table 6 .
Table 7 .
*denote significant at 1, 5 and 10 per cent level, respectively. a In propensity score matching 81 treatment households (out of 84) and 170 comparison households (out of 212) fall in on support.
Abdulla A, MacAuslan L, Schofield L. 2011. Towards sustainable vulnerability reduction for Kenya's ultra-poor living in urban slums. In International Conference: "Social Protection for Social Justice". Institute of Development Studies: UK; 13-15 April, 2011. Ahmed AU, Rabbani M, Sulaiman M, Das NC. 2009. The Impact of Asset Transfer on Livelihoods of the Ultra Poor in Bangladesh. BRAC: Dhaka; 56 (Research Monograph Series 39). Bandiera O, Burgess R, Das N, Gulesci S, Sulaiman M. 2013. Can Basic Entrepreneurship Transform the Economic Lives of the Poor? BRAC: Dhaka; 41(CFPR working paper No. 23). Banerjee A, Duflo E, Goldberg N, Karlan D, Osei R, Parienté W, Shapiro J, Thuysbaert B, Udry C. 2015. A Multifaceted Program Causes Lasting Progress for the Very Poor: Evidence from six Countries. Science 348(6236): Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. 2006. Household Income and Expenditure Survey 2006. Dhaka: Government of Bangladesh.
Time spent on various activities (hours/per day) by the working aged males(15-65 years) in last one year
Per capita annual income, value of business and non-business asset and financial market participation in last one year by survey households
Health seeking behaviour for recent illness (15-day recall) of the survey households
Sanitation and hygiene practices of the survey householdsNone of the differences is statistically significant at the conventional level.In propensity score matching 81 treatment households (out of 84) and 170 comparison households (out of 212) fall in on support.
Social awareness and empowerment of the respondentsIn propensity score matching 81 treatment households (out of 84) and 170 comparison households (out of 212) fall in on support.
Poverty and vulnerability are widely discussed development agenda all over the world. Bangladesh is no exception to this where various initiatives have been pursued such as pro-poor growth strategy, transfer programmes and microfinance to address poverty and vulnerability. In consequence, Bangladesh has achieved exhilarating progress in poverty reduction. For example, rural poverty has declined to 31.5 per cent in 2010 from 43.8 per cent in 2005, while urban poverty to 21.3 per cent from 28.4 per cent during the same period (Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 2011) . Obviously past efforts at poverty reduction mainly focused rural areas as majority of the poor live there 1 but time has possibly come to take on urban poverty with growing migration to cities. As of 2010, almost 28 per cent of the population are reported to live in urban areas compared to 20 per cent in the seventies (Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 2011) .
Available empirics show that promotion of self-employment activities (such as cow rearing or petty trading) is a popular anti-poverty programme implemented by various development organizations (Banerjee et al., 2015) . BRAC, one of the largest development organizations in the world, has also been implementing such type of programme to reduce extreme poverty under the umbrella known as 'Challenging the Frontiers of Poverty Reduction-Targeting the Ultra Poor' (CFPR-TUP). In addition to transfer of livestock assets, BRAC's programme includes other supports and services that will be discussed later. BRAC has been implementing the CFPR-TUP programme in the poorest rural areas of Bangladesh since 2002.The programme implemented in the rural areas has been found to be an effective approach in sustainably addressing extreme poverty (Das & Misha, 2010; Krishna et al., 2012) .The Bangladesh model to reducing ultra-poverty through asset transfer has also inspired replications in other eight developing countries (Ethiopia, Haiti, Honduras, Ghana, Pakistan, Peru, Yemen and India) in the world by CGAP in collaboration with the Ford Foundation (Hashemi & Montesquiou, 2011) . However, BRAC also started to pilot the programme in urban areas of Bangladesh in 2010. In tune with CFPR-TUP programme implemented in rural areas, the urban programme aims to improve the livelihoods of the ultra poor through a combination of: (i) asset transfer; (ii) supplementary feeding that includes weekly allowance and lentils; and (iii) livelihood support services such as social awareness and health supports.
Survey is conducted on both the participant and non-participant households of same communities in four slums of Dhaka city. Based on the cross-sectional data, we estimate the impact of the CFPR-TUP programme on the livelihoods of the participant households in urban setting. We present evidence on the short-term effects of the intervention (after six months). We find that the programme increases self-employment and income, empowers the women and improves food security to some extent. We also find positive impacts on beneficiaries' savings and health seeking behaviours. Our study is closely related to some recent studies (Bandiera et al., 2013; Banerjee et al., 2015; Blattman et al., 2016) on evaluating the transfer programme. While we focus on the effect of transfer programme on urban poor, Banerjee et al. (2015) , Bandiera et al. (2013) and Blattman et al. (2016) estimate the effect of transfer programme on rural poor. 2 The rationale for choosing Dhaka as the context for this study is as follows. Dhaka is one of the fastest growing mega-cities in the world, currently absorbing about 9 million people (2011 Population & Housing Census) . It is estimated that 300 to 400 thousand people who are mostly landless migrate to Dhaka city every year (World Bank, 2007) . They migrate from rural areas possibly affected by river erosion, climate change etc. in search of economic opportunities to better living standard. However, the hopes soon turn into hypes as the lack of basic facilities such as water and sewage cannot meet demand because of the scarcity of resources and lack of proper and effective initiatives. It may be mentioned here that only one-tenth of households of urban slums in Dhaka have access to a sewage facility and about one-fourth obtain water through piped supply (World Bank, 2007) . Besides, unemployment rate for the poor in urban areas is almost double than that of the non-poor (World Bank, 2007) . Hence, we thought that Dhaka would be a good context for studying the anti-poverty programme like CFPR-TUP.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides a brief description of the CFPR-TUP programme in general followed by the main features of urban CFPR-TUP programme. Section 3 lays out the methodology and analytical techniques used to analyse data set with results and discussion in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 summarizes the analysis and concludes providing some policy suggestions.
Recognizing the needs of differential treatment for tackling extreme poverty, BRAC started Income Generation for Vulnerable Group Development programme 3 with World Food Programme in 1985. The purpose was to create a strategic pathway out of poverty. Evaluation of this intervention showed that the impact was not sustainable even in the intervention period (Hashemi, 2001; Matin & Hulme, 2003) . Based on the bitter experiences from Income Generation for Vulnerable Group Development, BRAC designed the grant-based programme (CFPR/TUP) 4 to address extreme poverty. As mentioned earlier, until 2010 the scale of the programme was limited to rural areas, but since 2010, a pilot programme was initiated in the urban areas-mainly targeting the poorest from slums.
A point of departure between the CFPR-TUP programme implemented in rural and urban context needs to be mentioned. In the CFPR-TUP programme implemented in rural areas, the extreme poor households are selected through a participatory wealth ranking exercise followed by a proxy means of verification using a set of predetermined criteria. 5 In the urban areas, however, the wealth ranking exercise has not been used for the simple reason as different families living in the same slums hardly know each other. 6 After identifying the slums 7 for the pilot intervention, CFPR-TUP programme staff visited the slums and discussed with the key stakeholder (influential persons, slum 3 In this programme, the project households received a monthly ratio of 31.25 kg of wheat for a two-year period. Beneficiaries received additional skill training on income earning activities and financial services to engage in those activities. 4 For detail please see Ahmed et al. (2009) . 5 The selection criteria for the rural areas are: (i) the household owns less than 10 decimals of land; (ii) there is no productive asset in the household; (iii) school aged children are engaged in paid work; (iv) the household is dependent upon female's domestic work or begging; and (v) there is no active male member in the household. In addition, in order to be eligible for programme support, the household must have an active female member and must not receive any support from NGO/Govt. source, and also should not be a participant in any microfinance programme. 6 Urban poor settlements are composed of rural migrants, refugees and displaced people with different ethnic, linguistic and cultural backgrounds, and for these sorts of social diversity, relationships become more impersonal and sharing and kinship networks are less well developed (Abdulla et al., 2011) 7 BRAC selected four slums (Adabor, Johuri Moholla, Mohammadpur, Jurayeen) purposively based on poverty concentration and size. caretakers etc.). Based on the discussion, they prepared a list of all the households living in that slums along with brief economic status of each households. Then the poorest group of households was identified on the basis of the information provided by slum caretakers/other local influential people who are well acquainted with the slum dwellers. Later on, the programme staff visited the poorest households with a small questionnaire to check programme's eligibility criteria. 8 By and large, to be eligible for CFPR-TUP programme supports, an urban slum household must meet at least three of the five inclusion criteria set by the programme. After selection of the participants based on inclusion criteria, a final round of verification was made by senior level programme staff.
In the rural areas, CFPR-TUP programme provides productive assets such as cows, goats, nursery etc. as grants to the extreme poor households along with enterprise skills development trainings, daily allowance, health and social development services. In the urban areas, the participant women were asked about their areas of interests and their earlier working experience. Considering their interests, previous work experiences and physical capabilities, appropriate income generating activities were identified for each woman. Then she was provided with appropriate training to create a sense of entrepreneurship and confidence. The selected members were trained for three days in two phases: one day training at the BRAC branch office and two days at the spot level (training took place at the participants' convenient places such as home or work place). The intention for arranging training at the spot level was to minimize the opportunity costs of joining the training session. These trainings were provided only for once during the intervention.
Similar to the CFPR-TUP programme implemented in rural areas, urban CFPR-TUP programme channelled all the supports through an active female member of the selected household. The participants were transferred assets such as a van of two and a half square feet or a two wheeler van of two and a half square feet, along with vegetables or fruits, for selling commodities. Some of the participants were given tea making utensils with some snacks items or attires such as sari, salwar kameez, or multiple goods such as small toys, tiny utensils for children, ornaments etc. The trading items were chosen according to their skill and most importantly their interest so that they can start self-employment. These assets are transferred to the selected participants only for once. As any such new enterprise may take time to generate income, some of the participants may sell off the assets on the heels of heightened poverty or being impatient. Each participant was provided with a daily stipend of BDT 30 for consumption smoothening so that they do not sell off the transferred assets. The daily stipend continued for 26 weeks after the intervention started. Besides the income generating assets and the daily stipend, the participants also received medical advice, awareness raising information about the effect of child marriage, child labour and importance of education through weekly home visits by the CFPR-TUP programme staff. The participants also received special training on sanitation practice such as washing hand with soap after returning from work, using toilet, before eating etc. in the weekly meetings.
As mentioned earlier, the CFPR-TUP programme was launched in the urban areas in 2010. The programme initially targeted 90 households from four slums (Adabor, Johuri Moholla, Mohammadpur, Jurayeen) of Dhaka city. The target households received programme supports in January, 2010. For the purpose of evaluation of this pilot programme, all the participant households were selected for survey, but 84 households were successfully revisited. The survey was conducted after six months of the intervention, that is during June-July, 2010. 9 We use cross-sectional data to estimate the effects of the programme. With regard to controlling for the counterfactuals non-participant households were surveyed from the same community which numbered 212, more than double the number of participant households. The reason for surveying more non-participant households was that this group of households was likely to be more heterogeneous in terms of their socio-economic status compared to the participant households. Surveyed programme participants were selected based on specific targeting criteria, while surveyed nonparticipants were those who failed to meet programme eligibility criteria. Hence, chances were that non-participant group included both poor (but not eligible for programme supports) and near-poor as well. So many of the non-participants were not comparable to programme participants. Therefore, to increase the likelihood that adequate number of non-participants matched with programme participants, we surveyed more non-participant households.
The survey was administered by Research and Evaluation Division of BRAC. A semistructured 10 questionnaire was administered to collect information. The respondent of the survey was the main female member of the household. The questionnaire included questions related to demographic information of all the household members, employment information for last six months of all the members aging more than five years, health seeking behaviour of all members who had fallen ill in the last 15 days or had been suffering for more than last fifteen days for chronic disease, detailed information on dwelling, water supply, hygiene and drainage facilities, social and moral values, food and non-food expenditure, savings, outstanding loan and asset holding.
The questionnaire included 3-day recall questions to gather dietary information. The respondents were asked to recall all food items they consumed prepared at home and ready foods purchased from the street shops/hotels within the last three days prior to data collection. A checklist of food items was used by the enumerators to help the respondents recall the names and amount of the food consumed. The quantity of food consumed at household level was converted into grams. The amounts of ingredients of cooked food 9 The impact of the CFPR-TUP programme implemented in the rural areas was assessed after two/three years of intervention as it takes time to get returns from the enterprises (such as livestock) provided by the programme. But the type of assets transferred to the urban slum households is somewhat different from that of rural areas and likely to start earnings immediately after transfer is made. Hence, we have evaluated the intervention after six months. 10 Answers to few questions were open-ended.
were calculated using a conversion table that was provided to the enumerators. The number of persons eating per day was calculated based on the number of persons who ate at least one meal in particular day. In this case, apart from the three main meals, the snacks eaten in between including the road side ready foods were also considered. To standardize the consumption at the household level, all children aging below 10 years were weighted 0.5 to convert them into adult equivalent following Gibson (2005) and Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (2006) . The food expenditure was recorded based on the local market price of the foods consumed during the 3 days prior to data collection. We used local market value of the foods that are produced, received in kind or collected otherwise by the households, and included the value to estimate food expenditure.
Because we have no baseline survey, some baseline information related to asset holding, demographic characteristics, occupational choices of the main females and household's head were collected based on recall method. Information on these issues are used to match the intervention and comparison groups that we discuss in the following section.
As mentioned earlier, the non-participant households represent the general community of the slums covered by the programme. Hence, they are not directly comparable with the participant households. As such, we need to construct a comparison group that is essentially, comparable to the treatment group. We use propensity score matching technique that constructs a comparison group who are likely to be similar to those treated, having similar inclusion probability densities, contingent on the baseline participation characteristics. After constructing the comparison group, we estimate the effects of the treatment using the following equation: Average Treatment Effect for the treated :
where, ATT is the average treatment effect; Y 1 is outcome variable of the treated households while Y 0 is outcome variable of the untreated households. As mentioned earlier, in the absence of baseline survey, some baseline information was collected from the surveyed households using recalled method. This set of recalled baseline characteristics which are likely to determine participation in the programme have been used for matching the participant and non-participant groups based on propensity score matching technique. Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983) state that the probability of receiving treatment depends on pre-treatment characteristics.
where D takes a value of 0 or 1, indicating whether the observation falls within the treatment of the comparison group and X represents variables displaying the pre-treatment characteristics. The propensity scores are then matched for each of the individuals to determine which of them have higher probability densities of being within the treatment group. The ATT is then calculated using equation ( 1 ), restricted by the matched observations.
The impact of the programme estimated using equation ( 1 ) is the average difference in the outcomes for each intervention respondent from a weighted average of outcomes in J. Ara et al.
each similar comparison group of respondents from the matched sample. Our use of PSM to assess the impacts of the CFPR-TUP programme involved the following steps. First, by using a probit model, propensity scores for participation in the programme based on the recalled information (before programme participation) have been estimated. Second, we check the balancing properties of the data by testing whether treatment and comparison groups have the same distribution (mean) of propensity scores and of variables within groupings of the propensity score. Variables not satisfying this are dropped or replaced with alternative variables and the specification is rechecked. Third, according to Heckman et al. (1997 Heckman et al. ( , 1998) ) the quality of the match can be improved by ensuring that matches are formed only where the propensity score densities have 'common support', or where the distribution of the density of propensity scores overlaps between treatment and comparison groups. So, we estimate the matching equations using the common support restriction.
Subsequently, we match the propensity score between the treatment and comparison groups through the Kernel's nearest neighbourhood matching technique using STATA's psmatch2 command (see Annex Table A1 , Appendix, for regression results on the propensity scores). Along with household's characteristics such as age sex, education, marital status, households' socio economics characteristics, number of asset holdings and slum dummies have been used in the matching regression. We use slum dummies to capture the geographical heterogeneity. In total, 251 households fall within the common support of which 81 treatment and 170 comparison households (Annex Table A2 ). The rest 45 households remain in the off support areas.
We have constructed an index of empowerment using two indicators: (i) whether the respondent woman has the ability to spend their earned money without taking permission from anyone in her family, and (ii) if she herself or collectively with her husband can decide how far their children should study or when their children should get married. For each indicator, we assign a value '1' for positive answer and '0' for negative answer. Then we have summed up total scores for each household and divided by the total number of indicators. The value of the index lies from 0 to 1. Following the similar procedure we have constructed the social awareness index where six indicators such as (i) know the legal age of marriage for boys; (ii) know the legal age of marriage for girls; (iii) aware about we should not receive dowry during marriage of a boy; (iv) believe that daughter should get equal inherited assets; (v) believe that girls should continue education to be self-dependent; and (vi) think positively about family planning have been used.
Because the programme provided training on income generating activities followed by asset transfer, it is expected that the programme will directly affect employment, particularly self-employment. Although the assets are transferred to the main woman of the household, the effects could be reaped to others in the family. This is because of the fact that enterprises are often jointly managed to economize the use of labour. Table 1 Ultra Poor and Asset Transfer in Urban Setting shows PSM results of the effects of programme on employment of the working aged males. We report average hours of work per day on different earning activities by the working aged males. The information was actually collected for the last six months prior to the survey but we have converted it to per day work hours.
Results show that the males of the treatment group spend on average 0.48 h more on self-employment than the males of comparison group (3.07 vs. 2.59 h per day), and the difference is statistically significant at 5 per cent level. On the contrary, the male members of the intervention group devote comparatively less time on service (service includes work in garment industry), day labouring, paid jobs at shops/restaurants during the period under review. In these cases the differences between two groups are statistically insignificant.
Table 2 reports mean hours (per day) spending on various activities by the working-aged females of the intervention and comparison groups. It is observed that self-employment of the females in the targeted group has increased because of the intervention as reflected by their spending of 1.29 h more on self-employment than their counterpart females (2.10 vs 0.81 h per day), and the difference is statistically significant at 1 per cent level. On the other Table 2. Time spent on various activities (hours/per day) by the working aged females (15-65 years) in last one year Employment activities Treatment Comparison Difference Self-employed 2.10 0.81 1.29*** Day labourer 0.38 0.43 À0.05 Service 0.81 0.94 À0.13 Work at hotel/restaurant 0.07 0.01 0.06 Housemaid 1.48 1.53 À0.05 Others (begging, student etc.) 0.05 0.12 À0.08 Number of observations a 81 170 Note: ***, **and *denote significant at 1, 5 and 10 per cent level, respectively. a In propensity score matching 81 treatment households (out of 84) and 170 comparison households (out of 212) fall in on support.
hand, although the difference is not significant, the female members of the intervention group are found to spend less time for working as a day labourer, salaried worker and housemaid compared to the comparison group. Information in Table 2 also shows that the programme increases total labour hours of the females, indicating that capital constraint might have kept them out of work before programme. The findings that programme increases self-employment among both males and females echo the results from evaluating the ultra poor programme in rural areas (Bandiera et al., 2013; Banerjee et al., 2015) .
A prior reasoning would suggest that as self-employment and total labour supply increase because of the programme intervention, they could impart positive impact on income notwithstanding the magnitude of increase. Result shows that, as compared to comparison group, per capita yearly income of treatment group is higher by BDT 1339 (7 per cent higher than comparison group mean) (Table 3 ). But the difference is not statistically significant, may be because of low power of the study (i.e. small sample).
To make the programme effects sustainable over the longer term, the participants need to increase their asset base. Literature shows that access to asset is core element for eliminating poverty as well as broad based growth (IFAD, 2001) . Findings of this study indicate that the value of productive assets such as cell phone, rickshaw/van/tempu, cultivable land, cow, goat, chicken etc. (not limited within the assets transferred by the programme) of the treatment group is 22 per cent more than comparison group (BDT 27 572 vs. 22 552). Similar to productive asset, the value of non-productive assets such as television, fan, radio, bed, homestead and pond land, gold jewelry etc. of the treatment group is also higher than their counterparts (BDT 51 240 vs. 44 901). But the differences between treatment and comparison group for asset values are not statistically significant.
As mentioned earlier, CFPR-TUP programme participants in the urban areas are encouraged to save in a savings account at BRAC so that, without depleting assets, they could meet exigencies by withdrawing upon their savings. Formal savings accounts help
the poor save up and invest in future, and committed savings accounts empower women to make more of the economic decisions in the household which ultimately help to reduce poverty (Kendall, 2010) . Analysis of savings shows that after six months of the programme intervention, proportion of programme participants with cash savings is 96 per cent against 27 per cent of the matched comparison group (Table 3 ). Similarly, analysis of amount of cash savings shows that the treatment group have higher amount of cash savings compared to matched comparison group and the difference is statistically significant at 1 per cent level. The results also show that 35 per cent of the intervention group have outstanding loan against 45 per cent of the comparison group, but the difference is not statistically significant. The amount of outstanding loan, on the other hand, is found to be higher among the comparison group (p < .05). A decrease in outstanding loans among the participants may indicate that they are possibly less credit constrained compared to non-participants after the programme supports.
Food consumption is one of the most important measures of poverty. This section provides evidence on the effects of quantities of different food items consumed by the surveyed households along with food expenditure and calorie intake. Household food consumption is defined as the total amount of food available for consumption in the household, generally excluding the food taken outside unless prepared at home (Klaver et al., 1982) which serves as a direct indicator of food security as well as a substitution for a poverty indicator (WFP, 2007) . Table 4 reports per capita food consumption, calorie intake and food expenditure of the participant and non-participant households. Results show that per capita food intake (per day) increased significantly (123 g per person), and the effect is statistically significant at 5 per cent level. Similarly, the intervention increases per capita calorie intake by 199 kcal (per person/per day), and the impact is statistically significant at 10 per cent level.
With regard to amount of consumption of specific food items, statistically significant impacts are observed for vegetable and fruit consumption (p < .05). In case of per capita calorie intake from specific food items, it is found that higher amount of calorie is consumed by the programme participants from vegetables, fruits, fish and meat (p < .05). One can thus speculate that the increased food consumption would have an impact on the nutritional status of family members in the long run.
Findings also show that per-capita food expenditure of the treatment group is about BDT 45 per day against BDT 38 of the comparison group and the difference is statistically significant at 5 per cent level (Table 4 ). For each food items, per-capita expenditure is higher for treatment group although all the differences are not statistically significant. Research in developing countries shows that with the increase in income, the poorest households spend a major portion of their income on food. The increase in food expenditure not only increases the quantity but also increases the quality of the food (Subramanian & Deaton, 1996) . Our findings also show that both quantity and quality of food consumption increase because of the intervention. However, the question is whether the level of food expenditure by the treated households is adequate to maintain healthy life. As per the HIES 2010, per capita food expenditure of the general urban household is BDT 55.6. Although this figure is not comparable to the slum households, this may shed light with regard to how the slum households are lagged behind compared to the general urban J. Ara et al.
Table 4. Mean per capita per day quantity of food intake, calorie intake and food expenditure by survey households
households. It appears that per capita food expenditure of the comparison households is lagged by BDT 17 compared to general urban while the programme participant households are lagged by about BDT 11.
In the survey, we have collected information on health care seeking status of the respondents and their family members who fell ill during last 15 days prior to survey. It has been found that 20 per cent and 13 per cent of the members who are sick in the intervention and matched non-intervened groups, respectively, do not seek any health care, but the difference is not statistically significant (Table 5 ). Proportion of sick members seeking medical treatment from village doctor is found to be lower among the treatment group. On the other hand, comparatively more people from treatment group receive treatment from MBBS doctors than the non-participants. We can possibly hypothesize that the higher level of health care from qualified doctors arises from health awareness as well as health services provided by the programme (such as full treatment cost by the programme for any diseases). However, both the intervention and comparison groups are seen to be much dependent on the drug sellers for treatment, may be because these drug sellers do not charge any fees for treatment.
One of the aims of CFPR-TUP programme implemented in the urban areas is to make aware of the participants about healthy sanitation and hygiene practices. Findings show that almost all the households from intervention and comparison groups have access to basic facilities like cooking and drinking water directly supplied by the municipality (Table 6 ).
Results show that ensuring proper sanitation facilities has been the key challenge for the slum households. A negligible proportion of our sample households has access to sanitary latrine, but the proportion is higher for treatment group (27 per cent treated households use sanitary latrine against 21 per cent of comparison households, but the difference is not statistically significant). Almost all the programme participants (99 per cent) and a bit lower proportion of the comparison households (94 per cent) are aware about the effect of using sanitary latrine. This implies that although most of them are aware about the advantage of using of sanitary latrine, they do not practice it (i.e. do not use sanitary latrine); perhaps, they face space constraints to set up the sanitary latrine. Notably, in the urban slums, sanitation facilities are mainly provided by the slum owners, and all our sample households live in the slums as tenants. 11 Usually they live in a single room, and there is hardly any space in the slum so that the households themselves can set up any sanitary latrine. Hence, improving sanitation facilities through setting up new latrines are almost impossible. With regard to availability of drainage facility and throwing garbage in specific place, the proportions are higher among the intervention group but the differences are not statistically significant (Table 6 ).
As mentioned earlier, we construct an empowerment index using two indicators, while for social awareness index we have used six indicators. Results show that both empowerment and social awareness have increased because of programme participation (Table 7 ).
Specifically, mean of women empowerment index is found to be 0.82 for programme participants against 0.72 for the non-participants, and the difference is statistically significant at 5 per cent level. This indicates that the programme participant women have the ability to spend their earned money without taking permission from anyone in their family, and the women themselves or collectively with their husbands can decide how far their children should study or when their children should get married. Similarly, mean value of the social awareness index is higher for intervention group, and the difference is statistically significant at 5 per cent level. However, it is an open question whether this increased level of awareness translates into practice. Because we are evaluating the programme just after six months of intervention, we have not addressed this issue. We leave the question for future work.
11 Shafi (n.d.) reports that about 90 per cent of urban slum dwellers live as tenants on private land without any ownership of the land or even written agreements. Remarkably, lack of housing of the slum dwellers especially in South Asian countries is one of the most serious and widespread consequences and causes of poverty (Yuen, 2007) . Land is the centre of housing discourse, and without access to cheap and buildable land, it is not possible to build up affordable, well-ordered and incremental housing in large quantities (Choguill, 2007) .
Recognizing that conventional poverty reduction programmes fail to address the extreme poverty sustainably, BRAC has launched a grant-based support programme, known as CFPR-TUP in 2002. Until 2010, BRAC's CFPR-TUP programme was implemented in rural Bangladesh. In 2010, CFPR-TUP programme has started the intervention in the urban slums as pilot project. This paper is an effort to assess short-run impacts of the CFPR-TUP programme implemented in the urban areas.
We find that (i) the programme increases self-employment and per capita income; (ii) programme also has large impacts on food consumption, measured based on amount of food consumption, calorie consumption and expenditure on food; (iii) the programme also has positive impacts on beneficiaries' savings behaviour, health seeking behaviour, empowerment and social awareness. The findings of this paper have obvious implications for scaling up of the programme in the urban slum areas. But, we find that addressing unhygienic environment in the slums have been a key challenge of the programme. A collective effort of government, non-Government organizations and land-lords/slum owners is perhaps necessary to provide more sanitation and sewerage facilities. Findings of this study is for short run. Further study is needed to see the sustainability of the impacts in the long run.
*denote significant at 1, 5 and 10 per cent level, respectively. a In propensity score matching 81 treatment households (out of 84) and 170 comparison households (out of 212) fall in on support
a
In propensity score matching 81 treatment households (out of 84) and 170 comparison households (out of 212) fall in on support.
a
a
The five criteria are: (i) household is dependent on irregular income sources such as begging, rickshaw pulling etc.; (ii) the household has at least two children; (iii) the household is resident at the particular slum for minimum two years; (iv) the household is female headed, and the widowed/divorced/women are the main earner of the household; and (v) husband if any is unable to work due to old age and physical disability.
J. Ara et al.Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.