Executive Summary
Policy Issue:
Context of the Evaluation:
Details of the Intervention:
Savings account:
Results and Policy Lessons:
List of Figures and Tables
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AO
Introduction
Intervention, theory of change, and research hypothesis
Intervention
GUP
Asset Only
Outcomes of Interest
Theory of Change
Context
Timeline
Evaluation: Design, methods and implementation
Ethical Measures
Evaluation and Identification Strategy
Sample Size Determination
Sampling Design
Eligibility Criteria
Quantitative Sampling Design
Quantitative Sample Size
Qualitative Sample Size
Treatment Assignment
Data Collection and Construction
Data Quality Controls
Programme or policy: Design, methods and implementation 6.1 Key programme elements and programmatic activities
Monitoring system and activities
Impact Analysis and Results of the Key Evaluation Questions
Primary Quantitative Specifications
Primary Equation
Table 6: Orthogonality
Table 7: Joint test of significance
Pre-Analysis Plan
Ghana
Empirical Results
Followup Endline Endline
External Validity
Dissemination and future research
Baseline Univariate Tabulations: Any
Figure 1 :
Figure 2 :
Figure 3 :
Figure 4 :
Figure 5 :
Figure 6 :
Figure
Table 13 : Effects on use of time Table 14: Effects on political involvement and women's empowerment
Table 16 : Indexed family outcome variables and aggregates 7.4 Heterogeneities of impacts
Table 17 : Cost-Benefit Analysis
Table 18 : Attrition analysis Dependent Variable: Completed Survey, OLS
Asset Breakdown .........................................................................
Figure 1: Endline per capita consumption CDF ...........................................
Figure 2: Followup per capita consumption CDF .........................................
Figure 3: Endline livestock revenue CDF ...................................................
Figure 4: Followup livestock revenue CDF .................................................
Figure 5: Endline total savings CDF ..........................................................
Figure 6: Followup total savings CDF ........................................................
4-6 cedis (2014 PPP US$6.01-9.02) per week according to household size. This was provided only during the lean season iii. Weekly coaching on asset/enterprise iv. Education on finances, health and nutrition v. Healthcare component: all GUP clients and three dependents each were registered on the National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS) for the first two years of the program vi. Savings. All treatment households were encouraged to save as a part of the GUP program. Half of the total treatment households had a compulsory savings component (min of 0.5 cedis) weekly saving during the lean season when the households were receiving a consumption stipend from the program. The program helped all households open savings account and the field agents collected deposits from these households on a weekly basis.
Figure 1: Endline per capita consumption CDF
In Ghana, the adult survey was asked almost exclusively to women. Very few respondents in Ghana tended to livestock.
We present cumulative distribution function (CDF) graphs for three primary outcome variables for GUP households, AO households, and control households to gain insight into the heterogeneity of impacts. The outcomes we present are monthly consumption per capita, monthly revenue from livestock, and total savings.
In Ghana, individuals did not provide an estimate of the value of all assets. We use the relative value of assets across sites where a similar program was implemented and the average purchase prices available in each country (e.g. goats and cattle) to provide an estimate of the asset ITT. We calculate non-durable consumption equal to the total of Columns (2) and (3) in TablesS5a-1and -2 (i.e. total consumption less durable good expenditures) multiplied by the average household size times 12. The average household sizes used is 8.34 in endline and 8.48 in follow up. 2. Cost/benefit: To estimate the breakeven dissipation rate (i.e., the rate of decline of the impact on consumption from one time period to the next), we calculate the net present value of consumption in perpetuity beginning in year 4 with the equation [(ITT consumption*(1 -dissipation rate))/1.05]/(discount rate + dissipation rate) . We then solve for the level of dissipation such that the net present value of the costs equals the net present value of the benefits.
The study's first-stage clustered randomization at the village level made it so there was no contamination of the control group. All treatment households received the program, and no control group households did. The second-stage randomization within treatment villages assigned households to either receive the program or not. By comparing the households who did not receive the program but lived in treatment villages to households who did not receive the program but lived in control villages, one can see whether or not there were any within-village spillover effects of the GUP program. This analysis is in progress.
More than one fifth of the world's population lives on less than US$1.25 per day. While many credit and training programs have not been successful at raising income levels for these ultra-poor households, recent support for livelihoods programs has spurred interest in evaluating whether comprehensive "big push" interventions may allow for a sustainable transition to self-employment and a higher standard of living. To test this theory, in six countries researchers evaluated a multi-faceted approach aimed at "graduating" the ultra-poor from poverty. They found that the approach had long-lasting economic and self-employment impacts and that the long-run benefits, measured in terms of household expenditures, outweighed their up-front costs. Here we summarize the Ghana site, which had similar effects as the other successful sites.
More than one fifth of the world's population lives on less than US$1.25 per day. Many of these families depend on insecure and fragile livelihoods, including casual farm and domestic labor. Their income is frequently irregular or seasonal, putting laborers and their families at risk of hunger. Self-employment is often the only viable alternative to menial labor for the ultra-poor, yet many lack the necessary cash or skills to start a business that could earn more than casual labor.
In the past, many programs that have provided ultra-poor households with either credit or training to alleviate these constraints have not been successful at raising household income levels on average. However, in recent years, several international and local nongovernmental organizations have renewed their support for programs that foster a transition to more secure livelihoods. Combining complementary approaches-the transfer of a productive asset, training, consumption support, and coaching-into one comprehensive program may help spur a sustainable transition to self-employment. To better understand the effect of these programs on the lives of the ultra-poor, researchers conducted six randomized evaluations in Ethiopia, Ghana, Honduras, India, Pakistan, and Peru.
In Ghana, researchers partnered with implementing organizations Innovations for Poverty Action and Presbyterian Agricultural Services (PAS). The study took place in in the Northern and Upper East regions of Ghana, a region that is disproportionately poorer than the coastal south. Fifty-three percent of households in the study were living on US$1.25 a day or less when the study began, compared to 29 percent in Ghana as a whole.
To select the poorest members of the communities, the project team conducted a Participatory Wealth Ranking, in which villagers collectively ranked households according to their wealth during a community meeting. PAS conducted a short survey afterwards to verify the results of the ranking.
Researchers conducted a randomized evaluation to test the impact of a two-year comprehensive livelihoods program ("the Graduation approach") on the lives of the ultra-poor in northern Ghana. The approach was first developed by the Bangladeshi NGO BRAC in 2002 and has since been replicated in several countries. The Graduation program consisted of six complementary components, each designed to address specific constraints facing ultra-poor households.
In Ghana, researchers first randomly assigned villages composed of a total of 2,606 households, to one of two groups. One group served as a pure comparison group and was not offered the program. In the other group, 666 households were randomly assigned to receive the program. The other half of the households in that group did not receive the program, and served as a sub-comparison group to measure "spillover" effects on non-participating households living nearby. The program consisted of six complementary components, each designed to address specific constraints facing ultra-poor households:
1. Productive asset transfer: One-time transfer of a productive asset valued at GHS 300 (2014 PPP US$451). Forty-four percent of participants chose goats and hens, roughly a quarter picked goats and maize inputs, and small number picked shea nuts and hens (6 percent).
2. Technical skills training: Training on running a business and managing their chosen livelihood. For example, households who selected livestock were taught how to rear the livestock, including vaccinations, feed and treatment of diseases.
3. Consumption support: During the lean season (14 out of 24 months), households received weekly cash transfers of GHS 4-6 (2014 PPP US$6.02-9.03), depending on household size. 4. Health: Households were enrolled in the National Health Insurance Scheme and received health and nutrition education.
Half of the Graduation households received savings accounts through the Savings Out of Ultra Poverty (SOUP) program, also implemented by PAS. When PAS staff made their weekly visits, they collected deposits and households logged deposits. 6. Households visits: Weekly visits by PAS staff to provide to provide accountability, coaching, and encouragement.
In order to test the relative effectiveness of the savings and asset transfer component, the researchers also randomly assigned a portion of households (733 households) to only receive the SOUP program, while another portion (329 households) only received the asset transfer component of the program. Half of those in the SOUP program (362 households) received a 50 percent match on their savings to test the impact of incentives to save.
Researchers conducted the first endline survey immediately after the two-year program ended, as well as a second endline survey around one year later.
Note: Results forthcoming from the relative effectiveness of the savings component (with and without incentives) and an asset transfer-only treatment.
Across all six countries, researchers found that the program caused broad and lasting economic impacts. Treatment group households consumed more, had more assets, and increased savings. The program also increased basic entrepreneurial activities, which enabled the poor to work more evenly across the year. While psychosocial well-being improved, these noneconomic impacts sometimes faded over time. In five of the six studies, long-run benefits outweighed their up-front costs. In Ghana, households that received the Graduation program saw similar effects one year after the program ended: Economic impacts: Average total monthly consumption among treatment households was 2014 PPP US$33.62, an 11 percent increase over households in the comparison group. They spent $22.41 on food every month on average, 12 percent more than the comparison group. Households saw significant increases in asset holding and borrowed 58 percent more than those in the comparison group (2014 PPP US$35.60 monthly average), They also saved 2014 PPP US$16 a month on average, which was three times more than households in the comparison group.
Self-employment: Households experienced a 91 percent increase in non-farm income, earning 2014 PPP US$12.86 on average, as well as significant gains in livestock revenue, earning 2014 PPP US$40.60 a month on average, or 50 percent more than the comparison group.
Psychosocial wellbeing: Households that participated in the program did not report feeling significantly less stressed or happier than households in the comparison group.
Political involvement: Women in treatment households did not experience significant gains in empowerment in Ghana, and in fact experienced significantly less power in decisions about food in the household. However, treatment households did participate in more community meetings than those in the comparison group.
Cost-benefit analysis: Researchers calculated total implementation and program costs to be US$1,777 per household (2014 PPP US$5,408). However, estimated benefits of consumption and asset growth amount to 2014 PPP US$7,175 per household, representing an overall 133 percent return on investment. Table 1: Table 2: Timeline of intervention and evaluation ........................................
Table 3: Surveys by round ......................................................................
Table 4: Evolution of sample size .............................................................
Table 5: Qualitative Sample -Households .................................................
Table 6: Orthogonality ............................................................................
Table 7: Joint test of significance ..
Table 12: Effects on income and revenues ................................................
Table 13: Effects on use of time ..
Table 14: Effects on political involvement and women's empowerment .........
Table 15: Effects on physical and mental health.........................................
Table 16: Indexed family outcome variables and aggregates .......................
Asset Only
CAI Computer Assisted Interviewing CDF Cumulative Distribution Function GUP Graduation from Ultra Poverty HFCs High Frequency Checks HH Households IPA Innovations for Poverty Action IRB Institutional Review Board LEAP Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty LESDEP Local Enterprise & Skills Development Program NHIS National Health Insurance Scheme PAS Presbyterian Agricultural Services PII Personally Identifiable Information PPI Progress Out of Poverty Index PPP Purchasing Power Parity PRA Participatory Rural Appraisal PWR Participatory Wealth Ranking RCT Randomized Controlled Trial SADA Savannah Accelerated Development Authority SOUP Savings Out of Ultra Poverty ToC Theory of Change TUP Targeting the Ultra Poor
The Graduation from Ultra Poverty (GUP) program aims to improve the economic status of the very poor and move them towards self-sufficiency in Ghana. GUP is one of ten CGAP-Ford Foundation Graduation Pilots which adapted BRAC's Challenging the Frontiers of Poverty Reduction -Targeting the Ultra Poor program outside of Bangladesh.
The Ghana study is part of a larger six-country evaluation that assessed the impact of the Graduation program across different contexts. All six sites, which include Ghana, Ethiopia, Peru, Honduras, Pakistan and India, implemented and evaluated the Graduation program on similar timelines and with comparable instruments to facilitate cross-country comparisons. 1 The pooled results show strong, cost-effective impacts on livelihoods, living standards, and psychosocial status of the targeted households (Banerjee et al., 2015) .
The Graduation Approach is modelled as a method of enabling the ultra-poor to build businesses and improve their lives. The GUP program first identifies the ultra-poor within a community and later intensively works with these families to improve business-oriented skills. The GUP households are provided a productive asset (such as a cow or goats) with which they will develop their enterprise. Overall, the program aims to improve the incomes of the ultra-poor and hopes to see positive changes in school attendance of children, food security, health, and increased assets among the ultra-poor.
Evaluating this program's efficacy in West Africa is particularly important, as over half of the population lives below the poverty line and requirements for emergency relief, food aid, and international funds are on the rise. The effectiveness of the intervention has been evaluated at multiple stages, including: (1) whether the ultra-poor have been successfully identified; and (2) whether the whole program is effective at boosting income and overall social welfare during the intervention period and one year after its conclusion.
The novelty of the Graduation Approach lies not in its constituent components, but in the way components are combined in a holistic way to lift the very poor out of extreme poverty while ensuring they do not slip backward from shocks along the way. While many of the program's components (e.g., consumption support) are relatively welltested, to our knowledge, only one study was completed on the impact of the integrated set of Graduation components before this project. BRAC's Research and Evaluation Division conducted an impact evaluation of the original TUP program in Bangladesh (Ahmed et al., 2009) . The BRAC study compared those identified as eligible for the TUP program to those above the poverty cut-off, and found the ultra-poor who participated in the program made improvements in several areas, including income and food shortages.
Our evaluation advances the existing knowledge in several important ways. First, it enhances the rigor of the original evaluation design by conducting a randomized trial, removing any selection biases from the comparison between groups. Second, it evaluates a replication of the program in West Africa, extending the external validity of evidence of the effectiveness of the graduation model outside of the original implementer and into a different region, one with key policy importance.
In Ghana, the research design allows for measuring the impact of the whole program as well as two of the central components: the asset drop and the savings component delivered without the rest of the supporting features of the GUP program. We are also able to measure 'spillovers' within communities, allowing for a measure of impact on households with neighbors who benefitted from the program.
The remainder of the report is structured as follows:
-Description of the intervention, theory of change and research hypotheses
-Context and timeline of program implementation and evaluation -Description of evaluation design and methods -Description of intervention design and methods -Presentation of impact evaluation results -Discussion of implications, policy-relevant findings, and direction for future work
The Graduation from Ultra Poor (GUP) project in Ghana involves three treatment arms: the full Graduation from Ultra Poor (GUP) arm, the Savings Out of Ultra Poverty arm (SOUP), and the Asset Only arm (AO). GUP and SOUP also have sub-treatment arms within their interventions.
The households within the full GUP treatment arm received a comprehensive package of services, including:
(
) A productive asset transfer (such as a goat or guinea fowls) (2) A consumption stipend of 4 to 6 Cedis (2014 PPP US$6.01-9.02) per week, according to household size. The stipend was provided during roughly the lean season (July -Sept 2011, April 1 to October 15, 2012 and April 1 to July 7, 2013) (3) A healthcare component (4) Weekly coaching on assets/enterprises (5) Education on finances, health, and nutrition
The healthcare component involved registering all GUP clients and three dependents each on the National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS) in the first year of the program and renewing them in the second year. Field agents provided the consumption stipend, weekly coaching, and education components. They also helped clients create aspiration plans and set concrete goals based on their needs (e.g. build a room, purchase a cloth, etc.).
Half of the households in the GUP treatment arm had a compulsory savings component, which required a minimum of 0.5 Cedis (2014 PPP US$0.75) weekly savings during the lean season while households were receiving a consumption stipend (savings were voluntary during the months households were not receiving a consumption stipend). Our partner organization, Presbyterian Agricultural Services (PAS), hired 23 field agents to help households open savings accounts and collect deposits from them each week, following a Susu collector model. 2 These deposits were placed by station team leaders in individual clients' rural bank accounts. In order to withdraw money, households were required to go to the bank themselves.
Households chose the asset that was transferred to them. Below is the breakdown of asset transfer types (666 is the total number of HHs that received the GUP treatmentwe are missing the asset choices of 4 of them):
Table 1: Asset Breakdown Livelihood Option # of Clients % of clients 4 Goats/4 Hens 292 44.84 1 bag (100kg) shea nut/4 Hens 39 5.86 1 bag shea nut/1 acre maize production 34 5.11 4 goats/1 acre maize production 180 27.03 1 acre maize/4 hens 30 4.50 1 acre maize/2 pigs 24 3.60 1 bag paddy rice/4 hens 36 5.40 4 goats/1 bag sorghum 27 4.05 Missing Data 0.60 Total 666 100 SOUP Similar to the savings component of the GUP treatment, field agents opened savings accounts for households receiving the SOUP treatment and visited each week to collect voluntary savings.
In order to withdraw money, households were required to go to the bank themselves. Half of the households in the SOUP treatment arm had their savings matched at 50%. At the onset of the program, there was a maximum match of 1.5 cedis per week (for a 3 cedi deposit) but this cap was eventually removed. While we mention SOUP in the outline of the intervention, we do not have results at this time, as analysis is still ongoing.
The households within the AO treatment arm received goats as a productive asset without any related coaching or support. Unlike the other treatment arms, the AO group was not given the option of selecting their productive asset.
The primary research questions of interest include:
• What is the impact of the GUP intervention on social and economic outcomes (income, assets, school attendance of children, health, and food security)? • What is the viability of "graduating" the ultra-poor to food security and/or microfinance? • Is mandating savings necessary and sufficient for ensuring financial stability among the target group?
Overall, the program aims to improve the incomes of the ultra-poor and hopes to see positive changes in school attendance of children, food security, health, and increased assets among the ultra-poor.
The GUP intervention is based on the premise that the ultra-poor need a more holistic approach to graduate from poverty. The intervention combines a productive asset transfer with an intensive period of training, financial education, consumption support and saving, with the intention of providing participants all the inputs necessary to successfully start a business. Additionally, consumption support is provided during the lean season to prevent participants from consuming the income generated through the livelihood activity. The Graduation theory of change posits that a combination of all these factors will enable the ultra-poor to eventually graduate (after 24 months) into a more sustainable state. The use of a subsidy for an intensive, well-defined period with the goal of sustainable growth out of poverty could reduce long-term spending on safety nets.
The variations in the full program help us better understand what components of the program drive the effects. We are able to explore if the complementarities of the program's components make it effective or if the individual components, like savings or assets, drive the changes. By comparing the impact of the GUP, SOUP, and AO interventions, this study has aimed to determine the relative impacts and costeffectiveness of the three variants in improving household economic and social outcomes in the short and medium term.
Ghana has experienced steady growth for more than two decades. During this period, there have been several initiatives by various administrations to bring economic stability to the lives of the poor, from the Economic Recovery Programs of the 1980s and 90s to the Ghana Poverty Reduction Strategies of the last decade. In recent years, attempts have been made to target resources directly to the very poor. Examples of such programs are the Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty (LEAP) and Local Enterprises & Skills Development Program (LESDEP). In order to prioritize social protection, the former Ministry of Women and Children's Affairs has been renamed Ministry of Gender and Social Protection and is in charge of coordinating activities of sector ministries that work to improve the quality of life for the poorest people.
Though Ghana has experienced some success in meeting certain Millennium Development Goals, the successes are not evenly distributed. The 2007 UNDP Ghana Human Development Report indicates that the three northern regions continue to "harbour the poorest of the poor" (United Nations Development Programme, 2007). In part, this may be explained by geography, lack of infrastructure and rainfall patterns. The northern regions are landlocked and further away from the ports and industrial centers. The poor in these regions lack many of the basic resources to engage in some kind of productive activity. Access to financial capital is another limiting factor. The government has acknowledged these conditions that disparately affect northern Ghana and has launched an initiative to bridge the gap between northern and southern Ghana. This initiative is largely driven by the Savannah Accelerated Development Authority (SADA), which was set up to direct and coordinate development projects in the north.
Given this background, northern Ghana was chosen as the site for the GUP project. In order to be representative of northern Ghana, the sample was selected from two of three administrative regions in the north: the Upper East and Northern Regions. These regions share similar characteristics with the Upper West Region in terms of climate, culture, economic activities, housing structure, and religion.
Two hundred and forty-one out of 300 listed communities were selected based on number of eligible project participants found in the communities. The size of the study area was partly influenced by the ability of the partner organization, Presbyterian Agricultural Services (PAS), to implement the program effectively at scale. As a result, areas where PAS had previous work experience and field offices were selected, while still ensuring we were selecting communities in the area that had little to no NGO intervention.
For selected communities, a participatory wealth ranking (PWR) activity was carried out. This involved community members ranking all households by wealth. To verify the ranking, the Ghana "Progress out of Poverty" scorecard was administered to households that were categorized as poor by community members. All households eligible for the GUP program had to be categorized as poor according to the Ghana Progress out of Poverty Index (PPI), the national criteria for poverty. With this level of rigor in sample selection, we are confident that ultra-poor households selected from the 241 communities and subsequently randomized into treatment and control groups were largely similar to ultra-poor households in non-sample communities in northern Ghana at baseline.
Table 2: Timeline of intervention and evaluation Date Description August -September 2010 BRAC study tour by Implementation Coordinator and two PAS staff August -September 2010 Area/village selection by PAS September -October 2010 Field Staff recruitment/selection October 2010 Training of field staff in PRA/PWR processes November 2010 -January 2011 Identification of eligible households using PRA/PWR Tools January -March 2011 Verification of eligible households February -April 2011 Operational manuals and M&E tools developed February -April 2011 Baseline survey April 2011 Treatment/control households selected and final field staff hired May -June 2011 Field staff trained to deliver GUP services/products July 8, 2011 -July 7, 2013 Conduct weekly home visit to include: • Procurement and transfer of asset to 666 GUP clients • Coaching/training on asset and enterprise development • Provision of consumption stipends • Mobilization of savings and financial education • Education on essential health care and nutrition January 2012 -January 2013 June 3 -July 7, 2013 Short surveys (3 month-long surveys -January, July, January) General counseling July 7, 2013 Five remedial trainings for field staff July 2013 Stakeholder review and planning meeting August 1 -31, 2013 Conduct exit sensitization meetings at community/household levels Graduation/end of implementation weekly activities Mop-up program outstanding activities Write final Ford report July -September 2013 January -March 2014 June -August 2014 January 2015 Endline Endline Agriculture/Livestock Follow-up Follow-up Agriculture/Livestock October 1, 2013 -January 31, 2014 GUP 2: Re-sensitization on NHIS/savings & distribution of boxes January 15 -31, 2014 Write final implementation Report
As per Institution Review Board (IRB) regulations, all Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA) surveys require informed consent from surveyed individuals. The consent form for GUP was approved by the IRB prior to the start of the study. Respondents had the option to decline to take the survey or to refuse to answer any questions within the survey at any point. Additionally, the consent form listed an IPA phone number which they could call in case of any questions or complaints. All surveyed individuals signed two copies of the consent form: one for IPA records and one for them to keep.
All survey questions and the study protocol were reviewed by the IPA and Yale IRB. Whenever documents, scripts, or protocol were altered, an amendment was submitted to the IRB for approval.
GUP villages (and households within villages) were randomly assigned to receive any given intervention. Every village in the sampling frame had an equal chance of being selected to receive the program. Given the positive results of the six-country evaluations, IPA is working with governments, donors and implementing partner organizations to disseminate the results and discuss scale-up efforts so that other eligible individuals may also benefit from the research findings.
In handling the data cleaning and analysis, all raw data was stripped of personally identifiable information (PII), and the PII was stored separately, encrypted using TrueCrypt encryption technology. We took careful measures to ensure participants' privacy.
IPA used a randomized controlled trial (RCT) to study the impact of the GUP program.
Our evaluation strategy involved seven rounds of surveying: baseline, midline 1, midline 2, midline 3, endline, endline agriculture/livestock, follow-up, and follow-up agriculture/livestock. All rounds included a household-level survey. The household survey collected information on assets, savings, income and consumption, health and education, businesses and money transfers, livestock and agriculture, social capital, and household's placement in the community. The baseline survey also had a village and market survey to learn about community activities, institutions, and infrastructure. For the baseline, midline 1-3, endline, and follow-up surveys, there was an additional adult survey that asked a separate set of questions covering time-use, health, risk aversion, social capital, and time-and money-related preferences. Adult surveys were asked to one woman per household. The same woman was surveyed in each round that the adult survey was administered.
The baseline, endline, endline agriculture/livestock, follow-up, and follow-up agriculture/livestock surveys were administered to the full sample. Midline surveys 1-3 were administered to 30% of the sample, and the same subset was interviewed in all three midline rounds. The endline agriculture/livestock and follow-up agriculture/livestock surveys only included agriculture and livestock modules and were administered after the harvest season. A summary of the surveys by round is below:
Table 3: Surveys by round Survey Date Harvest/Lean % of communities Adult Survey Other Notes Baseline Feb -April 2011 Lean 100 Yes Village + Market Survey Midline 1 Jan 2012 Harvest 30 Yes Midline 2 July 2012 Lean 30 Yes No Agriculture questions Midline 3 Jan 2013 Harvest 30 Yes Endline Jun-Aug 2013 Lean 100 Yes Endline Ag/lvstck Jan-Mar 2014 Harvest 100 No Only ag/livestock questions Follow-up Jun-Aug 2014 Lean 100 Yes Follow-up Ag/lvstck Jan 2015 Harvest 100 No Only ag/livestock questions
In addition to our quantitative surveys, we also had a qualitative component. Forty families across six communities, representing a diverse mix of village and household characteristics, were chosen to participate.
Three qualitative surveyors spent several weeks of every month living in the chosen villages and conducting in-depth semi-structured interviews with GUP beneficiaries, as well as PAS workers and other community members in leadership positions. The interviews were designed to develop life histories, community histories, and experiences with the program. Each month, after three weeks in the villages, the qualitative researchers reconvened to debrief and discuss future possible lines of inquiry and generally adapt the research to the reality on the ground.
The sample size for the GUP study was calculated to be in line with power calculations done for other sites in this set of studies. Power calculations for the GUP project suggest a total sample size of 2601 (25% treatment and 75% control) households yields a lower bound minimal detectable effect size of 0.127 standard deviations with analysis at the individual level (i.e., using the fact that we randomized at the individual level within treatment groups) and an upper bound minimal detectable effect size of 0.204 standard deviations with analysis at the village level (i.e., using the fact that the first level randomization was to assign villages to either treatment or control, and thus ignoring the second stage individual level randomization within treatment villages).
Our estimation of power utilizes the following assumptions:
1. Power is fixed at 0.8 2. Significance is fixed at 0.05 3. Portion of participants in treatment group is 0.25 4. The intracluster correlation for the group level randomization is 0.10 5. The total sample size is 2607. For the group level randomization, the number of cluster are 154 and the number of observations per cluster are 16.92
We use the following formula to calculate the MDES (from Bloom 2005):
Table 4: Power Calculations Randomization at Individual Level (random assignment to treatment and control, within treatment villages) Randomization at group level (random assignment of villages to treatment and control) p (intracluster correlation) 0 0.1 Power 0.8 0.8 Statistical significance 0.05 0.05 Multiplier 2.8 2.8 Portion of participants in Treatment 0.25 0.25 Portion of participants in Control 0.75 0.75 J (number of clusters) 2607 154 n (number of observations per cluster) 1 16.92 MDE (in standard deviations) 0.127 0.204
Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) tools and questionnaires were used to target the ultra-poor households in our sample communities. PAS first provided IPA a list of 300 communities in which no sustained NGO work was ongoing. A Participatory Wealth Ranking (PWR) process was then used to rank the well-being of households within each community. Communities were divided into groups by gender, to allow a more frank assessment of wealth ranking within the community. Each group identified relevant characteristics and household indicators that represent wealth within that specific community. The focus groups then categorized households based on these identified characteristics into the following buckets: very rich, rich, poor, and very poor (ultra-poor). After households were sorted, the groups met together and reconciled discrepancies in their respective categorizations.
This was followed by a survey modeled after the set of questions in the Progress out of Poverty Index (PPI). The PPI survey was administered to over 6,000 poor and ultrapoor households. The exclusion criteria applied using this survey were as follows:
• Ownership of > 30 small ruminants • Ownership of > 50 fowl
• Roof made of manufactured materials (i.e. corrugated iron) that were purchased by the household (not provided by an NGO) • Ownership of a mobile phone The last two criteria caused sample size problems, especially in the Tamale area, and were eventually dropped as exclusion criteria. Any communities with fewer than eight eligible households were dropped. Communities with fewer than eight but more than three eligible households were later used as our AO sample.
During the survey, auditors conducted back checks and field managers followed up with enumerators to ensure surveys were conducted properly. The evaluation team later cleaned the PPI data and removed households which met the following exclusion criteria:
• No eligible female lives in the household (an eligible female is 18-64 years of age) • The household owns more than 50 fowl • The household owns more than 30 small ruminants • The household has a roof made of non-natural materials (such as corrugated iron) that was purchased independently by household members Once these households were removed from the sample, a list of more than 4,000 potential ultra-poor households was drawn up.
This list was then passed on to the verification team. In communities, verification teams first confirmed the categorizations of each poor and ultra-poor household with the chief and elders. In addition to verifying the PPI-like questionnaire, the following questions were asked:
• Is any member of the HH a drug addict or alcoholic?
• Does any HH member have disability (blindness, physical disability, and/or mental illness)? • Is the HH living in a roofed house with a roof made from manufactured sheets (e.g. aluminum sheets) that were purchased by the HH? • Does a member of the HH own a mobile phone?
Households for which community leaders raised doubts about any of the above issues were revisited for confirmation.
Once all households had been ranked and approved, any household which did not have a person meeting the following criteria was removed:
• Female • Between the ages of 18 and 64 (to reduce attrition in the sample through marriage or death). This age bracket was finally opened to include 64 years and above.
• Individual meeting the above two criteria must be the household head, wife of the household head, or daughter-in-law of the household head After all of the exclusion criteria were applied, 4,000 households were identified as eligible for our study.
In addition to pure control communities, there were control households within treatment communities (to identify spillovers). Within GUP and SOUP villages, we randomly assigned households to the following groups:
For household selection, we ensured balance on the following variables:
(1) number of compounds (2) distance to market (3) household size (4) an asset index created using principle component analysis (5) age of primary respondent (6) a livestock index using principle component analysis (7) whether the primary respondent operates business (8) total plot area owned by household (9) whether someone in the household is a member of a savings group All households in the same compound had to have the same treatment status.
The table below details the various stages of targeting, sample selection and the survey rounds. 1,394 clients (666 GUP/732 SOUP) received weekly home visits during the program and 666 GUP clients were supported with asset and enterprise development of their choice. Our final analysis is done using our sample at endline and follow-up. Tests for differential attrition can be viewed in Section 8.
Table 4: Evolution of sample size GUP -Savings 333 HHs GUP -No Savings 333 HHs GUP -Control 642 HHs SOUP -Not Matched 371 HHs SOUP -Matched Savings 362 HHs SOUP -Control 510 HHs GUP -Savings 88 HHs GUP -No Savings 92 HHs GUP -Control 161 HHs SOUP -Not Matched 98 HHs SOUP -Matched Savings 101 HHs SOUP -Control 157 HHs GUP -Savings 88 HHs GUP -No Savings 91 HHs GUP -Control 159 HHs SOUP -Not Matched 96 HHs SOUP -Matched Savings 102 HHs SOUP -Control 155 HHs GUP -Savings 84 HHs GUP -No Savings 82 HHs GUP -Control 152 HHs SOUP -Not Matched 91 HHs SOUP -Matched Savings 98 HHs SOUP -Control 149 HHs Pure Control 76 c ommuities 1,235 HHs GUP -Savings 325 HHs GUP -No Savings 321 HHs GUP -Control 626 HHs SOUP -Not Matched 351 HHs SOUP -Matched Savings 345 HHs SOUP -Control 476 HHs Asset Only 152 HHs Asset Only -Control 147 HHs Pure Control 76 c ommuities 1,252 HHs GUP -Savings 329 HHs GUP -No Savings 319 HHs GUP -Control 623 HHs SOUP -Not Matched 356 HHs SOUP -Matched Savings 344 HHs SOUP -Control 484 HHs Asset Only 154 HHs Asset Only -Control 144 HHs Pure Control 76 c ommuities 1,203 HHs GUP -Savings 313 HHs GUP -No Savings 319 HHs GUP -Control 608 HHs SOUP -Not Matched 355 HHs SOUP -Matched Savings 338 HHs SOUP -Control 474 HHs Asset Only 150 HHs Asset Only -Control 141 HHs Pure Control 76 c ommuities 1,252 HHs GUP -Savings 326 HHs GUP -No Savings 317 HHs GUP -Control 619 HHs SOUP -Not Matched 355 HHs SOUP -Matched Savings 344 HHs SOUP -Control 485 HHs Asset Only 152 HHs Asset Only -Control 149 HHs PWR PPI Survey 6,000+ HHs Verific ation Proc ess 300 grey Communities GUP 78 c ommunities 1,272 HHs SOUP 77 c ommunities 1,172 HHs GUP 23 c ommunities 318 HHs SOUP 23 c ommunities 338 HHs Asset Only c ommunities 299 HHs Endline Survey 275 Communities 3,978 HHs Midline 3 Survey 69 Communities 1,020 HHs Use PPI Survey data to identify 45 additional communities to use in an asset only treatment arm Pure Control 23 c ommuities 364 HHs Endline Agriculture and Livestock Survey 274 Communities 4,005 HHs GUP 78 c ommunities 1,271 HHs SOUP 77 c ommunities 1,184 HHs Asset Only c ommunities 298 HHs Followup Survey 273 Communities 3,901 HHs GUP 77 c ommunities 1,240 HHs SOUP 77 c ommunities 1,167 HHs Asset Only c ommunities 291 HHs Followup Agric ulture and Livestoc k Survey 273 Communities 3,999 HHs GUP 77 c ommunities 1,262 HHs SOUP 77 c ommunities 1,184 HHs Asset Only c ommunities 301 HHs Midline 1 Survey 69 Communities 1,071 HHs Pure Control 23 c ommuities 374 HHs Baseline Survey 231 Communities 3,850 HHs Pure Control 76 c ommuities 1,299 GUP 23 c ommunities 338 HHs SOUP 23 c ommunities 353 HHs GUP 78 c ommunities 1,308 HHs SOUP 77 c ommunities 1,243 HHs Midline 2 Survey 69 Communities 1,073 HHs Pure Control 23 c ommuities 382 HHs GUP 23 c ommunities 341 HHs SOUP 23 c ommunities 356 HHs
Qualitative Sampling Design Six communities were selected for our qualitative sample -two from each of the three stations. The communities were split between GUP and SOUP, were of varying sizes, and were all located far from major roads and towns. Village leaders in eligible communities agreed to the long-term presence of the qualitative researchers and each participating family gave oral consent to take part in the qualitative study.
Within each community, the qualitative research team sought to maximize variation between participant households, along the following demographic variables:
• Number of families within compound (single nuclear family versus multiple nuclear families in an extended family compound) • Female headed household (widows) versus households with support from a male (either family member or spouse) • Households with co-wives versus households with only one wife
The sample contained 40 families across six communities. Specific characteristics of the families are very context-dependent, including livelihood choices due to geographic location, (lack of) infrastructure, and access to particular resources. The table below shows the distribution of sample families across intervention groups over the entire qualitative sample. In each household, at least one individual was interviewed on a regular basis to monitor their experiences over the course of the GUP program. In total, 57 individuals in 40 households were interviewed.
Table 5: Qualitative Sample -Households Intervention Group GUP community GUP Matched Savings 9 GUP Unmatched Savings 5 GUP Control 7 SOUP community SOUP Matched Savings 9 SOUP Unmatched Savings 5 SOUP Control 5
Most households farmed as their primary economic activity, with a range of additional supplemental activities. Interviews were predominantly conducted with women, although male household heads were also interviewed. Participants ranged in age from early 20s to mid-70s. All households had at least one child living in the household or compound; these were predominantly the household's own children, but some were grandchildren or nephews and nieces.
The community members belonged to a number of ethnic groups including Dagomba, Mamprusi, Mosi, Builsa, Hausa, and Fulani. Ethnic identity often determines which families share resources and labor due to common bonds, and some ethnic groups specialize in a particular livelihood. For example, traditionally, the Fulani were nomadic pastoralists who herded cattle, sheep, and goats in the region. The Fulani in this sample largely came from Burkina Faso or another region of Ghana and settled in these communities. They care for the cattle of other community members in exchange for the milk from the cows, which they consume or sell in larger town markets. The Fulani also described being left out of development aid in the past, either from the government or from NGOs and remarked on the strength of the GUP program for helping the households in their community.
The Ghana experiment was a clustered randomized trial, with randomization at both the village and the household level. In Ghana "villages were randomly selected to be treatment or control villages, and then treatment house-holds were randomly selected within the set of eligible households in treatment villages. The goal of this design was to be able to measure spillovers." (Banerjee et al., 2015) Randomization was carried out remotely by the research team (using a Stata script). The Ghana site had "two additional treatment groups (savings only, and productive asset grant only) to 'unpack' those aspects of the intervention." (Banerjee et al., 2015) . The savings treatment and asset-only treatment has not been fully analyzed yet.
As mentioned previously, the GUP study included several rounds of primary data collection, including a baseline survey, three midlines (administered to 30% of the study sample), an endline, and a follow-up survey one year after completion of the study. Details of data collection activities can be found in section 5.2.
All data collection activities were carried out by teams of enumerators using netbooks. The surveys were programmed using Blaise software. The full data collection team was comprised of 46 individuals: 30 enumerators (10 per station), 6 team leaders (1 team leader for every 5 enumerators), 3 field managers (1 per station, overseeing 2 team leaders and their enumerators), 3 auditors and data editors each, and 1 associate field manager responsible for monitoring activities alongside the project coordinator and manager. Each auditor was assigned to one station and was responsible for conducting back-checks, booking interview appointments for subsequent days of surveying, and conducting market surveys, when relevant. The data editors (1 per station) were responsible for scrutinizing the collected data and reconciling the survey and backcheck data to produce discrepancy reports.
Prior to the launch of the survey, all team members attended five days of classroom training on survey content. The first three days of training were spent going over all of the questions (and relevant translations) on the survey. Role play activities were incorporated into the training to help team members practice administering the survey. On the fourth day, the teams were introduced to electronic data collection and practiced using the netbooks to conduct the survey. Classroom training was followed by two days of field training where the team conducted surveys in an area that was not a part of the sample. This allowed the enumerators to improve their knowledge of the survey and practice surveying with real respondents. Baseline aside, every round of survey work involved a false launch (i.e., survey work began in a community that was not a part of the sample, but the data collection team was not aware of this and carried out all work as if the actual survey had begun). The work of the team was closely supervised and feedback/clarifications were provided in real time to ensure operations improved the following day (actual launch). All data collection activities and trainings for enumerators were consistent across treatment and control groups. The enumerators were not aware of the household or community-level treatment assignment.
All trainings were led by the project and field managers. The project coordinator provided additional support for the second half of the training when Computer Assisted Interviewing (CAI) technology was introduced.
The data collection team was paid a daily wage through the IPA office in Ghana.
Respondents were compensated in-kind for completing the survey. The compensation for the GUP survey was a bar of soap per questionnaire.
The roles and responsibilities of the implementation and evaluation teams were clearly defined and the two teams were kept separate in order to minimize association between the program and the evaluation. The implementation team always identified themselves as PAS staff, while the evaluation team always identified themselves as IPA staff.
During the data cleaning process, treatment status was not incorporated into the data until immediately before analysis, reducing the risk of research staff introducing any biases in the cleaning and management of the data.
The following data quality measures were in place prior to and during the data collection process:
1. Design & piloting of survey instruments. All survey instruments were extensively piloted for comprehension, cultural appropriateness, and length (to avoid survey fatigue). The electronic programming was bench-tested and fieldtested to iron out any errors in programming and data format. 2. Use of CAI software. CAI software helped reduce survey errors in a variety of ways. This included limiting the range of answer choices (i.e. age); automating complex calculations (i.e. total income); pre-populating tables with information presented earlier in the survey (i.e. household member names); and conducting logic checks. The GUP surveys utilized CAI software for all rounds of data collection. 3. Field management and editing. During the course of data collection, surveyors were managed in the field by a supervisor. The supervisor typically was a former surveyor with extensive experience in field research. The supervisor ensured that surveyors contacted the correct respondents and completed the surveys in a thorough but timely manner.
4. Accompaniments. The supervisors accompanied each enumerator for approximately 10% of their surveys. The goal of the accompaniments was for the supervisor to listen to the enumerator administer the survey to make sure the enumerator's understanding of the survey questions was correct and that they were administering the survey properly. 5. Backchecks. The auditors on the data collection team were tasked with revisiting 10% of the respondents who had already been surveyed to readminister some selected questions one day after the original survey had been administered. The editors then compared the original answers to the backcheck survey answers to check for discrepancies. Backchecks were conducted to ensure accuracy of data. If the original surveyor failed to find the correct respondent (a challenge in areas where many people share first names and surnames), or falsified data, the backcheck would identify this, and the survey would be conducted again. 6. Scrutiny & high frequency checks (HFCs): All the surveys were regularly checked for completion, missing fields, inconsistencies, etc. For each survey type, a HFC program was written in advance and run at the end of the day, checking all incoming surveys for common errors. HFCs were also used to detect patterns of behavior and performance for surveyors (e.g. amount of time spent on a survey). This information was used to monitor the performance of the enumerators.
There was no data entry for GUP surveys since all data collection was done using CAI.
All personally identifiable information (PII) associated with the respondents was saved in an encrypted folder. Only the Principal Investigators and other research staff members approved by the IRB had access to this information.
During the data cleaning and coding process, no changes to the data and variables were hardcoded: all changes were made using .do files in Stata. All incoming data was checked for adherence with skip patterns and for logical consistency. Finally, all .do files related to cleaning and analysis were code-checked by a second staff member for errors.
GUP was one of the ten CGAP-Ford Graduation pilots, all adaptations of BRAC's "Challenging the Frontiers of Poverty Reduction/Targeting the Ultra Poor program."
The program was adapted for northern Ghana by IPA and PAS. GUP staff and PAS leadership traveled to Bangladesh for training from BRAC.
As outlined in section two, the GUP program consisted of the following components: IPA worked with PAS in northern Ghana to deliver the program content for GUP. IPA was responsible for the design of the content, the monitoring of implementation activities, and the evaluation. PAS is a regional organization that has been providing a range of services including technical agricultural training, financial advising, and health services in the Northern, Upper East, and Upper West Regions of Ghana since 1967.
When exploring options for partner organizations for GUP, IPA prioritized prior experience in service delivery to rural communities and existing presence in the northern regions of Ghana. PAS was the best fit for these requirements given their involvement in delivery of rural development services to a wide area of northern Ghana. Furthermore, they had existing field offices in the study area with permanent staff (from managers to field agents) stationed in these field offices.
Details on the setting in which the program content was delivered are provided in Section 3 of this report. The GUP program was implemented in the Upper East and Northern Regions.
Program exposure lasted for a period of two years, from July 2011-2013. All asset transfer related activities were completed within the first year of the program.
Coaching/training on the productive livelihood was provided prior to the transfer of assets. Weekly visits to the households were continued through the entire length of the project. All GUP clients (and three dependents each) were registered for the national health insurance in the first year and the registration was renewed for a second year. Consumption support was only provided during the lean season (July -Sept 2011, April 1 to October 15, 2012 and April 1 to July 7, 2013). Field agents collected savings from households on a weekly basis for the length of the program.
No incentives were provided to increase participation in the program. There was compensation, a bar of soap, provided to all participants (treatment and control) for completing the surveys.
The program did not require any special materials or technology. All participants were given lockboxes to hold their savings at the end of the program to encourage GUP clients to keep saving after the program ended. All data collection utilized CAI technology.
IPA had a designated implementation team that monitored all project-related implementation activities. The implementation team comprised of the implementation coordinator and the implementation manager. This team worked closely with PAS throughout the project life cycle to ensure that implementation activities went according to project design. The implementation team was responsible for monitoring community selection, the PWR process, and the asset transfer process. During the asset transfer process, the implementation team visited 10% of all treatment households to ensure delivery of assets. Additionally, the implementation coordinator and manager held weekly debriefing sessions with all field agents to discuss progress and challenges related to field activities.
The IPA team developed the implementation manual for the project. Before the rollout of the project, there was a training session for all PAS field agents on the implementation manual and field protocols. PAS was aware that the study was a RCT.
The IPA team conducted several rounds of trainings (prior to the start of the program and quarterly after that) for the PAS staff to familiarize them with the concept of RCTs and the implications for implementation. The trainings also included material on how to avoid violating the research design during implementation.
In addition to this, specific content training was provided by various agencies depending on the topic. For example, the Ministry of Food and Agriculture staff trained PAS staff on livestock rearing and care. Similarly, a consultant counselor was hired to train the staff on how to coach and counsel the GUP clients during the weekly visits.
These professional counselors were also invited to provide refresher trainings during the quarterly trainings held by IPA.
There were no major changes to the core program during the course of the study period. There were some minor changes made that we list below:
1. The initial plan was to conduct 4 midline surveys, with the fourth between endline and follow-up, but this was replaced by the livestock/agriculture surveys.
2. Monitoring activities indicated that the SOUP-Matching clients were not saving differently from the regular SOUP clients. The PIs decided to raise the cap for matching savings to see if this would result in additional savings. The original product offered a 50% match up to 3 cedis. The revised product raised the matching limit to 20 cedi.
The recruitment strategy and selection process is explained in greater detail above in sections 5.3 (Sample size determination) and 5.4 (Sample design). The aim of the program was to target the poorest population in rural settings in northern Ghana. As mentioned earlier, the eligibility criteria were altered slightly after observing the reality on the ground. The World Bank reports that the share of households in Ghana living below PPP US $1.25/day is 29%. In our sample, 54% of households lived below PPP US $1.25/day. Additionally, for our sample, the median daily per capita consumption (including health and durable goods spending) is $1.45, median monthly per capita consumption is $43.35 and mean monthly per capita consumption is $53.97. This indicates that the targeting for GUP was successful.
Changes to eligibility criteria during the targeting and selection process have been noted above. There were no adverse events during the course of GUP implementation.
Our primary equation for GUP analysis is as follows:
where 𝑌𝑌 𝑖𝑖 𝑘𝑘 is the outcome k of interest for either household or adult i, 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑎𝑎 𝑖𝑖 is an indicator for having been randomly selected into the program, 𝑍𝑍 𝑖𝑖 𝑘𝑘 is the household or adult's baseline value of the outcome variable k (coded as zero, with an indicator for missing baseline, whenever it was not available), 𝑼𝑼 𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔 is a vector of dummy variables, one for midline 2 and one for midline 3 (we averaged together midline 2, midline 3, and endline for our endline results since they were all done within the same calendar year), and 𝑽𝑽 𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔 is the vector of all variables included in stratification.
During randomization, we re-randomized to ensure balance on a set of variables. These variables (community level: number of compounds, distance to market; household level: hhsize, asset pca index, age of primary respondent, livestock pca index, primary respondent operates business, total plot area owned by hh, household is member of savings group) are included as controls. We also include geographic block strata, which are included here as dummies for each block. In other words, we include a dummy for each treatment village but none for pure control villages, since randomization didn't occur at the individual level for households in control villages.
For the AO analysis, the equation is slightly different:
We no longer have controls for stratification (as these were baseline values, which we did not have for our asset only households) and we no longer control for the inclusion of midline 2 and midline 3, as AO households were not identified at the time of these surveys. We pooled endline and endline agriculture/livestock survey data, in addition to follow-up and follow-up agriculture/livestock survey data, so 𝑹𝑹 𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒔𝒓𝒓 is a dummy to control for the round.
Balance Tables Below is a table showing tests on orthogonality for households that received any GUP treatment (either with or without savings). "Control" refers to control households within GUP villages and all households within control villages. For AO households, no baseline was performed so we are unable to test for balance.
The table below shows a joint test of significance on all of the family outcome variables we present results on later within this section. We looked at a number of welfare variables as well as ten indices and aggregate variables generated from these welfare component variables. The table below tests the joint significance of these ten indices and aggregate variables.
Notes on Data During the data cleaning process, some outliers were recoded, but there was no systematic approach, such as through winsorizing or truncating values. For our analysis on the asset only households, variables were winsorized at the 99 th percentile.
In terms of our data collection, it should be noted that all outcomes are self-reported as all of our data was collected via surveys.
We did not file a pre-analysis plan. Instead, we include all results from the surveys, regardless of their statistical significance. Additionally, we do not have any empirical results of interest outside those that we present. Our comparison control group is made up of all households in the control villages and control households within GUP villages.
Orthogonality, Comparison of Means (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) Ghana Control Mean (standard error) 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 (-0.0227) (-0.0227) (-0.0227) (-0.0227) (-0.0227) (-0.0228) (-0.0229) (-0.0227) Treatment Mean (standard error) -0.0368 0.0957 -0.0131 -0.0247 0.0044 0.0488 0.0005 0.0218 (-0.0357) (-0.043) (-0.0254) (-0.0255) (-0.051) (-0.0394) (-0.039) (-0.0395) p-value from t-test of equality of means 0.4044 0.0387 0.7518 0.5537 0.9289 0.281 0.9914 0.6293 Orthogonality, Baseline Characteristics on Treatment Ghana -0.0370 0.096** -0.0130 -0.0250 0.0490 0.0044 0.0120 0.0005 0.0220 (0.0440) (0.0460) (0.0420) (0.0420) (0.0450) (0.0490) (0.0450) (0.0450) (0.0450) Observations 2602 2604 2606 2601 2579 2605 2560 2572 2617 R-Squared 0.000 0.002 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 Physic al Health Index Mental Health Index Politic al Involvement Index Women's Empowerment Index Total per capita c onsumption, standardized Food Sec urity Index Asset Index Financ ial Inc lusion Index Total Time Spent Working, Standardized Inc omes and Revenues Index
Joint F-test of treatment on all family outc ome variables 0.846 p-value 0.573
Below we include the outcomes for several welfare variables for households that received any GUP treatment (i.e. received either GUP with a savings component or GUP without a savings component) and for households that were part of the asset only intervention. Results presented are intent-to-treat estimates.
All values are reported in 2014 USD, Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) terms. Standard errors are reported in parentheses below the estimates.
The estimates that are reported reflect the increase in the given variable associated with a household that was included in the given program. For example, in the consumption table below, being included in the GUP program is associated with a PPP US $2.82 increase from the control mean in total consumption per capita per month.
Table 8: Effects on per capita consumption Any GUP (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) Total Consumption per capita, month Food consumption per capita, month Nonfood consumption per capita, month Durable good expenditure per capita, month Total Consumption per capita, month Food consumption per capita, month Nonfood consumption per capita, month Durable good expenditure per capita, month Any GUP 2.82** 2.18** 0.44 0.05 3.22*** 2.41*** 0.55 0.03 (1.42) (1.04) (0.76) (0.037) (1.19) (0.81) (0.66) (0.04) Observations 2525 2525 2525 2525 2434 2434 2438 2442 R-squared 0.19 0.18 0.10 0.07 0.16 0.16 0.08 0.10 Control mean 40.8 30.1 10.3 0.34 30.40 20.00 8.63 0.34 Baseline mean 54.4 44.90 9.5 0.47 54.40 44.90 9.50 0.47 Asset Only Total Consumption per capita, month Food consumption per capita, month Nonfood consumption per capita, month Durable good expenditure per capita, month Total Consumption per capita, month Food consumption per capita, month Nonfood consumption per capita, month Durable good expenditure per capita, month Asset Only -0.64 -0.06 -0.64 -0.03 -0.14 -0.45 0.54 0.02 (2.48) (2.01) (0.91) (0.055) (2.18) (1.57) (0.86) (0.07) Observations 1528 1528 1528 1528 1482 1482 1486 1491 R-squared 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.03 0.06 0.06 0.05 0.05 Control mean 38.10 27.80 8.95 0.32 32.40 21.60 8.53 0.36 Endline Followup Endline Followup Note: 1. All values reported in 2014 USD, Purchasing Pow er Parity (PPP) terms 2. Column (1) is the sum of columns (2) through (4).
Table 9: Effects on food security Any GUP (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) Everyone in the household gets enough food everyday No adults skipped meals No one in the household went a whole day without food No c hildren skipped meals Everyone in the household gets enough food everyday No adults skipped meals No one in the household went a whole day without food No c hildren skipped meals Any GUP 0.03 0.02 0.039* 0.00 0.01 0.03 0.03 0.03 (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.03) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) Observations 2501 2501 2499 2500 2438 2438 2437 2436 R-squared 0.26 0.20 0.14 0.15 0.15 0.20 0.18 0.21 Control mean 0.27 0.26 0.71 0.45 0.25 0.23 0.73 0.44 Baseline mean 0.15 0.12 0.50 0.41 0.15 0.12 0.50 0.41 Asset Only (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) Everyone in the household gets enough food everyday No adults skipped meals No one in the household went a whole day without food No c hildren skipped meals Everyone in the household gets enough food everyday No adults skipped meals No one in the household went a whole day without food No c hildren skipped meals Asset Only 0.00 0.01 -0.04 -0.01 0.01 -0.01 -0.04 -0.07 (0.03) (0.03) (0.04) (0.05) (0.04) (0.03) (0.05) (0.05) Observations 1528 1528 1526 1527 1489 1489 1488 1487 R-squared 0.10 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.10 0.12 0.08 0.09 Control mean 0.27 0.27 0.72 0.45 0.26 0.24 0.74 0.45 Endline Followup Endline Followup Table 10: Effects on asset ownership Any GUP (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Asset Index Productive Asset Index Household Asset Index Asset Index Productive Asset Index Household Asset Index Any GUP 0.25*** 0.25*** 0.07 0.34*** 0.34*** 0.16*** (0.05) (0.05) (0.05) (0.06) (0.06) (0.05) Observations 2584 2584 2583 2442 2442 2442 R-squared 0.32 0.28 0.42 0.30 0.27 0.37 Control mean 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Baseline mean 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Asset Only (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Asset Index Productive Asset Index Household Asset Index Asset Index Productive Asset Index Household Asset Index Asset Only 0.00 -0.07 0.01 0.06 0.03 0.00 (0.07) (0.07) (0.08) (0.07) (0.08) (0.08) Observations 3081 3081 1528 3042 3042 1489 R-squared 0.07 0.06 0.09 0.05 0.04 0.07 Control mean -0.04 -0.03 -0.05 -0.03 -0.03 -0.04 Note: 1. Columns (2), ( 4 ) and ( 6 ) are reported in 2014 USD, Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) terms. 2. For Any GUP results, indices weight assets based on their relative values using several other countries' values we collected in similar surveys. They are standardized to Ghana's control group mean in every time period. For Asset Only, we show results for z-scores indices on ownership of certain assets.
Followup
Table 11: Effects on financial inclusion Any GUP (1) (2) (3) (4) Total amount borrowed, last 12 months Total savings Total amount borrowed, last 12 months Total savings Any GUP 5.43 16.8*** 13.1* 10.5*** (4.80) (3.09) (7.51) (2.39) Observations 2522 2520 2437 2435 R-squared 0.099 0.074 0.048 0.098 Control mean 17.30 7.15 22.50 5.49 Baseline mean 22.90 3.85 22.90 3.85 Asset Only (1) (2) (3) (4) Total amount borrowed, last 12 months Total savings Total amount borrowed, last 12 months Total savings Asset Only 1.01 0.83 2.42 0.63 (3.73) (1.36) (4.43) (1.34) Observations 1526 1525 1488 1488 R-squared 0.022 0.034 0.034 0.038 Control mean 13.50 3.84 18.00 4.19 Note: 1. All values are reported in 2014 USD, Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) terms. 2. Total amount borrowed includes formal borrowing, informal borrowing and borrowing where the source was not specified. Endline Followup Endline Followup Table 12: Effects on income and revenues Any GUP (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) Household livestoc k revenue, month Household agric ultural inc ome, month Household Non-farm Mic roenterprise Inc ome, month Household Inc ome from Paid Labor, month Household livestoc k revenue, month Household Non-farm Mic roenterprise Inc ome, month Household Inc ome from Paid Labor, month Any GUP 1.31 0.61 5.32*** 0.84* 13.6*** 6.13*** 0.24 (1.23) (0.62) (1.82) (0.48) (2.43) (1.92) (0.67) Observations 2519 2531 2522 2525 2436 2438 2438 R-squared 0.13 0.38 0.06 0.03 0.21 0.08 0.04 Control mean 9.2 6.5 6.90 1.88 27.00 6.73 2.39 Baseline mean 31.8 9.73 3.12 9.73 3.12 Asset Only Table 15: Effects on physical and mental health
Below is a table of GUP outcomes for several welfare indices and aggregate variables generated from the components of each of the preceding tables. We report the standardized mean treatment effect and the q-value, which has been adjusted for all 10 hypotheses. Results presented are mean standardized intent-to-treat estimates, including controls for the household's value at baseline and controls for geographic units used for block stratification and variables used in randomization to ensure balance. Dummy variables are included for endline 1 regressions for whether the values include each wave of short survey data. Standard errors are reported in parentheses below the estimates.
Because these estimates are standardized, they are interpreted differently than our results presented above: the estimates are the number of standard deviations (measured on the control group) the treatment is above the control mean. For example, looking at column 1, we see that receiving the GUP treatment increases per capita consumption by 0.097 standard deviations. Both treatment and control groups were administered the same survey, and the implementation and evaluation team were kept separate. The evaluation team did not know the treatment status of the households at the time of surveying. The fact that many of the treatment effects observed after one year of program implementation persist a year later (and a year after the end of the program) lends confidence to the internal validity of the study. As with any survey, there is the possibility that respondents would tailor their answers based on what they think the surveyor wants to hear. For example, participants might under-report income if they think that by doing so they will be more likely to benefit from a future program. The fact that the evaluation team and implementation teams were kept separate, and that the evaluation team clearly stated that it was not linked to any program were ways that this risk was reduced. There is no evidence to suggest systematic over-or underreporting.
The qualitative results draw interesting insights that are consistent with the quantitative analysis. The interviews conclude that the households that received the productive asset treated it as an investment -a finding that is supported by the increase in productive asset holdings and increased livestock revenue at both endline and follow-up. The qualitative findings suggest that households did not substitute out of activities such as farming and microenterprise to focus on livestock-rearing, but added livestock-rearing to their portfolio of income-generating activities. The quantitative data supports this finding that households do not see the different activities as substitutes, but rather view them as additional sources of income. The fact that agricultural, business and paid labor income do not see a decline provides evidence for this.
The GUP intervention's sample, which was randomly selected, is reflective of the population that would be considered when thinking about scaling up the GUP program: the rural ultra-poor. Furthermore, the GUP intervention was one of six different interventions carried out across six countries to test the same basic program. These replications, which had very similar components, were carried out by various implementing partners in different cultural contexts. All interventions targeted the same population in each respective country: the ultra-poor. The promising results that these combined interventions yield are robust and can be used to inform similar programs.
There are, nonetheless, some questions that arise when thinking about scaling up the GUP intervention and thinking about its applicability to other contexts. The first is the target sample: this intervention yields positive results among the rural poor. The GUP communities were primarily ones where residents worked in agriculture and animal husbandry. The intervention may need to be adapted if it were to be implemented in urban settings or in settings with access to more sources of labor. The second consideration is to make sure that the productive asset is one that is contextually appropriate and sustainable. In the Graduation program replication in Honduras, the chickens that were given to beneficiaries were not native to the area, and as a result, many of the chickens died over the course of the intervention.
The GUP program results have been shared as part of the larger set of Graduation interventions with implementing agencies in Ghana and policymakers. The studies were received well, and have sparked discussion around scale-up and directions for future research, both in Ghana and elsewhere. The results are aligned with the expectations of the implementing partners. The participants at the two local dissemination conferences (in Tamale & Accra) were excited by the results and the events drew substantial media attention. The Ministry of Gender and Social Protection and its collaborating partners (World Bank and UNICEF) are interested in exploring possibilities to include components of the graduation program to the LEAP cash transfer program. See the PIP report for more details on dissemination events. Although there has been no client targeted dissemination, the results are aligned with the aspiration plans that the participants set at the start of the project.
In terms of key lessons to help inform the design of monitoring plans, IPA found that giving PAS short term deliverables combined with frequent field visits by the IPA implementation team helped ensure that activities were going as planned. The combination of the two also helped ensure adherence to research design. Finally, quarterly refresher trainings (focused around research design and planning activities for the next quarter) helped build the implementing partner's capacity and strengthened IPA's relationship with them.
Based on the positive results of the GUP study, along with results from the other graduation evaluations, researchers are now working to learn how best to scale the program: measure the value of each program component to determine whether the program can be delivered at lower cost. The GUP evaluation design allowed testing the effectiveness of just the asset drop and of just the savings component. This report has presented results of the asset drop group, and these preliminary results suggest that the asset drop is not sufficient to see the same level of positive results in consumption, income, and asset holdings. Results from the savings-only group are pending.
disabled clients to implement the program alone. When they were identified and talked to, some started supporting but a few still did not put in much.
Interference of husbands: Yet, another challenge also worth mentioning is the interruption of some clients' husbands in the program. For instance, some husbands sold out some asset of the HH and refused to use the money to support the HH up keep. Such men were again identified and re-sensitized. One client husband married a second wife because they harvested their maize and had over 7 bags which to the Ultra poor husband placed them in another class of rich. The community Chief and elders, however, supported the man's idea saying that no man in the village has one wife except an Ultra poor.
Late update of passbooks: We also addressed how best to keep clients passbooks regularly updated by dialoging with bank officials who eventually released point officer per bank to update clients savings passbook. Until the end of implementation, the individual savings at the household level continued to be a chosen option for the GUP Pilot program. Nevertheless, some passbooks balance did not balance the clients bank balance and had to take PAS staff one whole month to correct the abnormally.
Resignation of staff: In the course of implementation four partner staff (2 Team Leaders, 1 Monitoring Agent and 1 Field Agent) and one IPA GUP Pilot staff (Implementation Manager) resigned. These persons were all replaced.
Poor management of finances -both clients and management levels: IPA Team had to conduct several monitoring visits, on the spot remedial trainings and several audits to help correct most challenges.
Inadequate road worthy vehicles/monitoring: In the course of implementation, the partner staff faced major constraints/challenges in the areas of inadequate road worthy vehicles and too much work load of partner staff to the neglect of regular monitoring. That really affected the full involvement of FAs from the beginning who would have loved to have regular monitoring visit by partner staff as motivation. To address this short fall, IPA had two field staff (Implementation Manager and a Monitoring Agent) to beef up the weekly monitoring.
GUP + Control There were days without enough food in the last 12 months Freq. Percent No 350 13.44 Yes 2,254 86.56 Total 2,604 100 y g months Freq. Percent No 1,321 51.02 Yes 1,268 48.98 Total 2,589 100 Household has a business Freq. Percent No 1,669 64.09 Yes 935 35.91 Total 2,604 100 Household owns a television Freq. Percent No 2,575 98.89 Yes 29 1.11 Total 2,604 100 Any household member ill in the past 30 days Freq. Percent No 894 34.36 Yes 1,708 65.64 Total 2602 100
There were two additional randomized evaluations of CGAP-Ford Foundation Graduation pilots: one in Yemen was delayed due to civil conflict and another in India was conducted by a separate research team.
The Susu model is an informal savings model that allows people to save and access their money securely and gain a limited access to credit.