Table of Contents
List of Figures
List of Tables
Chapter 1: Introduction
The TUP Program
Selection procedure
Another exclusion criterion is that, if the households are already receiving
Support package
Research Objectives
Chapter 2: Like Mother Like Daughter? Occupational Mobility among Children under the Asset Transfer Program
Introduction
How can the Asset Transfer Affect Child Labour?
A Theoretical Framework
Empirical Evidence
Experimental Design
Data
Estimation Model
Descriptive Statistics
Preliminary Findings and Discussion
Impact on Study of Children Aged 5-8 Years at Baseline
Impact on Work of Children Aged 5-8 Years at Baseline
Gender Effects on Working Days in Different Employment Activities of the Children
Impact of Intervention on Employment by Baseline Employment
Concluding Remarks
Chapter 3: Behavioural Benefits of Credit Transfer: Evidence from a
Introduction
Measuring Impatience and Risk Aversion
Time preference tasks
Risk attitude tasks
Estimation Model
Econometric Model for Binary Variables/Outcomes
Econometric Model for Ordinal Variables/Outcomes
Econometric Model for Count Variables/Outcomes
Impact on Time Preference and Discount Rates
Impact on discount rates
Impact on time consistency
Impact on Risk Aversion
Impact on risk attitude in financial matters
Impact on risk attitude in general
Conclusion
How Does Customized Credit Transfer Impact on Empowerment?
Data and Measures
Estimation Model
Econometric Model for Nominal Variables/Outcome
Econometric Model for Binary Variables/Outcome
Results and Discussion
Impact on Influence in Household Decision-making
Impact on financial investment
Impact on financial market participation
Impact on influence on children's issues
Impact on healthcare expenditure
Impact on Social inclusion
Impact on Awareness About Social and Legal Issues
Impact on Violence Against Women
Impact on Competitiveness
Concluding Remarks
Chapter 5: Policy Implications
Figure 1 . 1
Figure 1 . 2
Figure 1 . 3
Figure 2 . 1
Figure 2 . 2
Figure 2 . 3
Figure 2 . 4
Figure 2 . 5
Figure 2 . 6
Figure 2 . 7
Figure 2 . 8
Figure 3 . 1
Figure 3 . 2
Figure 3 . 3
Figure 3 . 4
Figure 4 . 1
FigureFigure 1 . 1
Figure 1 . 3
2 .
(
20Chapter 2 :
Figure 2
Figure 2 . 1
Figure 2 . 2
28Chapter 2 :
J
Figures 2 .
Figure 3a Figure 2 . 3
Figure 2 . 4 FigureFigure 2 . 5
Figure 6a Figure 2 . 6
Figure 2 . 7 Figure 2 . 8
Figure 2 . 9
Figure 1a
Figure 3 . 2
9`
FigFigure 3 . 3
Figure 3 . 4
Figure 4 . 1
50
116Chapter 4 :
120Chapter 4 :
Table 2 . 2
Table 2 .
Table 2 .
Table 2 .
Table 2 .
Table 4 .
Table 4
Table 4
Table 4
Table 4 .
Table 4
Figure 1.1 Poverty trends using unidimensional and multidimensional space ............
Figure 1.2 Existing approaches to meet the needs of the poor ....................................
Figure 1.3 Graduation approach ..................................................................................
Figure 2.1 Intra-household time allocation decision .................................................
Figure 2.2 Experimental design .................................................................................
Figure 2.3 Changes in key indicators on education and income of the children age 5 to 16 years across all waves ...............................................................
Figure 2.4 Kernel Density Estimation of children's time to study and other occupations for each year (age 5-16 years) ..................................................
Figure 2.5 Changes in key outcome variables for the children age 5 to 16 years across all waves ............................................................................................
Figure 2.6 Changes in key indicators on education and income of the children age 5 to 8 years at baseline across all waves ...............................................
Figure 2.7 Kernel Density Estimation of children's time to study and other occupations for each year (age 5-8 years at baseline) ..................................
Figure 2.8 Changes in key outcome variables for the children age 5 to 8 years at baseline across all waves ..........................................................................
Figure 3.1 Histogram of dichotomous outcome variables at baseline .......................
Figure 3.2 Histogram of ordinal hypothetical lottery outcome at baseline ...............
Figure 3.3 Histogram of discount rates and willingness to take a risk in general .....
Figure 3.4 Histogram of respondents willingness to financial investment ................
Figure 4.1 The way "Customized credit transfer" model works and impacts on women's empowerment: Theory of Change ................................................
Figure 1.1a: Unidimensional poverty Fig. 1.1b: Multidimensional poverty
the transfer program. A substantial body of literature documents positive
Figure 1.3 Graduation approach Source: TUP program
how does customized credit transfer program affect rural women's intertemporal choice and risk attitude? 3. how does customized credit transfer program affect rural women's socio-economic empowerment and confidence level? 1.3 Thesis Outline This thesis examines the effects of one of the anti-poverty programs titled "Targeting the Ultra Poor" (TUP) program implemented in Bangladesh since 2002. This was achieved by exploring firstly, the causal effects of the asset transfer program on the occupational mobility of the grant recipients children in the longer run, secondly, how does the customized credit transfer program impact on rural women's intertemporal choice and risk attitude, and finally, how does the program affect rural women's socio-economic empowerment and confidence level. The structure of this document is as follows: Chapter 2 reviews the causal effects of the asset transfer program on study and work of the ultra poor children in the longer run. Chapter 3 reviews the behaviours of the program participants and provide causal evidence about how does the customized credit transfer program affect rural women's time preference and risk attitude. Chapter 4 explores the impact of the customized credit transfer program on rural women's ability to influence in households decision-making, awareness about social and legal issues, and confidence level. Finally, Chapter 5 discusses the overall implication and future perspectives of this research.
) find a reduction of working hours in paid works for boys but in household chores for girls. Second, it causes deleterious outcomes such as in the context of Brazil, Pais et al. (2017) notice that the program raises children's working hour.Edmonds and
2015) finds a short-term positive effect of the asset transfer program on children's education expenses and working hour on livestock rearing, but no effect on school enrolment. Bandiera et al. (2016) also find a positive impact of the same program on children's working hour on livestock rearing and land cultivation. The mixed evidence suggests that low-income families are unlikely to withdraw their children from work while schooling may or may not increase. Thus, in this study, we focus on whether the transfer programs that target the main female of the households for their financial upliftment affects the volume and nature of work the children are involved in. Not much is known about how the grant-based asset transfer program affects the dynamics of intra-household time allocation of children between study and work. This study uses four waves of longitudinal data to estimate the short and long-term impacts of BRAC's randomized asset transfer program on study and work of the children of grant recipient women.
Like Mother Like Daughter? Occupational Mobility among Children under the Asset Transfer ProgramFor simplicity, assume loss due to forgone goods, ci = 0 and Z3 is given.
rise in earning opportunities would rotate the opportunities curve clockwise through the initial position 'a' if Z1 is the more earning-intensive activity in the {Z1, Z2} domain. The movement from point a to point b is the substitution effect. The associated increase in income would expand the new opportunities curve upward, and move the equilibrium point to c. The income effect, measured by the movement from 'b' to 'c', would increase the demand for both Z1 and Z2. The 'net' effect in Figure2.1 is dominated by the substitution effect, but it is not necessarily known a priori.
Figure 2.1 Intra-household time allocation decision
Figure 2.2 Experimental design
Like Mother Like Daughter? Occupational Mobility among Children under the Asset Transfer Program
Figures 2.4 and 2.5 demonstrate the statistics on key outcomes i.e. employment
Figure 3a Rate of school dropout Figure 3b Education (Years of schooling)
Figure 2.4 Kernel Density Estimation of children's time to study and other occupations for each year (age 5-16 years)
Fig.6c, the percentage of treatment children who earned personally has been increased slightly in the short and medium run but increased highly in the longer run where the rates are a bit higher for the children of control across all waves. This infers that the children of treatment households involve more in studies and less in personal earning activities than the children of control households. In case of average earnings, like the full sample, we find that average yearly incomes increase sharply from baseline to end-line survey for the younger children of treatment and control households (Fig.6d).27 This implies that school enrollment increases slightly in 2009 i.e. after two years of intervention and the rate is higher for the children of treatment households. It indicates that immediately after receiving program's support, enrollment rate of the younger children increases. Different from full sample, the rates decline in 2011 and 2014 for the children of both treatment and control households.
Figure 6a Rate of school dropout Figure 6b Education (Years of schooling)
Figure 2.7 Kernel Density Estimation of children's time to study and other occupations for each year (age 5-8 years at baseline)
Figure 2.9 Visualization of DiD results for each employment categories
their children into the labour market, and reallocates their time away from distress jobs and substituting or complementing mother's work. Eventually, most of the time less-income families are in a dilemma whether to send their children in school due to the trade-off between current earnings and possible potential gains from education (Fumagalli & Martin, n.d.). We take the advantage of longitudinal data and explore that study time decreases in the short run which corresponds to Becker's model described earlier. Initially, an increase in income opportunities leads to decrease the educational opportunities. And later, the 44Chapter 2: Like Mother Like Daughter? Occupational Mobility among Children under the Asset Transfer Program associated increase in income would expand the educational opportunities that were reduced earlier. Though study time decreases during 2007-2009 (Table
demonstrates the impact of the program on children's involvement in different occupations over the year by baseline employment; both for boys and girls (age 5 to 16 years). The columns are presented for each baseline employment activity to showing the incremental effects between each of the survey year. Results indicate no significant effect on the children of participant households who were involved in household chores at baseline to switch in the same occupation or study in the shor-medium and loner run. However, their engagement to agricultural self employment are likely to increase by 73 pp (percentage point) during the earlier period i.e. 2007-2009 (p<0.01) while it reduces by 57 pp in medium term i.e. during 2009-2011 (p<0.01). They are, however, 46 pp more likely to be involved in non-agricultural self-employment (p<0.10) in the longer-term (i.e. during 2011-2014) and 50 pp less likely to involve in unskilled work during 2007-2009 (p<0.10). The children of participant households who
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. The columns are presented for each baseline employment activity to indicating the incremental effect of the program on working hours. Intent-to-treat (ITT) estimates are reported based on a difference-indifference specification estimated using OLS. The coefficients shown are those on the treatment-survey wave interaction terms. Each coefficient corresponds to a separate regression that control for subdistricts fixed effects and a set of baseline demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. All outcomes are measured at the individual level.
). Results significantly indicate a higher correlation (comparatively) between grant recipients and their children's working time in the initial years but not so much in the latter years. But in the case of non-participant households, no such trend observes.54Chapter 2: Like Mother Like Daughter? Occupational Mobility among Children under the Asset Transfer Program
two rounds of panel data (baseline in 2016 and a follow up in 2018) from a Randomized Controlled Trial intervention conducted by the TUP program in 11 districts in Bangladesh. Site selection was based on the criteria that the program was never implemented before 2016 or if any, the intensity of coverage was relatively low.30 In each of these 11 districts, the program selected eight (8) branch offices for the intervention and carried out the selection of eligible households using the process discussed earlier. Two of eight branch offices were selected randomly as a control group and the remaining six branch offices were selected as treatment-the eligible households in the treatment branches receive the OTUP support package.31 Hence, out of the 88 branches (i.e. 11*8=88) from the 11 districts, there are 66 treatment branches and 22 control branches. Around 100 OTUP households from each branch were ultimately selected for the baseline and follow-up surveys.The baseline and the follow-up surveys were conducted by the Research and Evaluation Division (RED) of BRAC between November and December of 2016 and 2018, respectively.
Fig. 3.1 shows the frequency distribution of these outcome variables at baseline i.e. in 2016. We estimate the following linear difference-in-differences logistic regression model for binary outcomes (i.e. willingness to accept Tk. 200 today=1; otherwise=0) ! "#$ of individual % measured in district & at time t (2016 baseline (t = 0) and followed up in 2018 (t = 1)): ! "#$ = ( + * + , "# + * -. $ + /(. $ * , "# ) + 34 "5 + 6 # + 7 "#$ (9) Where , "# is a dummy variable denoting respondent from program participant household % in district d. T denotes survey wave and the parameter / is the doubledifference estimator of the average program effect. X represents a vector of the respondent and household characteristics at baseline (i.e., in 2016); District-level fixed effects are controlled through a set of district dummies 6 # , and 7 "#$ represents an error term for individual % in district & at year 9. The coefficient of * + is the effect of treatment on time preference relative to control in the baseline whereas the coefficient of * -is the effect of time on time preference relative to the baseline among the control.
differenced models for each outcome ! "#$ of individual % measured in district & at time t (2016 baseline (t=0) and followed up in 2018 (t=1)): ! "#$ = ( + * + , "# + * -. $ + * : ; $ + * < (. $ * , "# ) + * = (, "# * ; $ ) + >(. $ * , "# * ; $ ) + 34 "5 + 6 # + 7 "#$
Figure1aWilling to accept Tk. 200 today Figure1bWilling to accept Tk. 200 today instead of Tk. 250 after one month instead of Tk. 250 after two months
Fig. 4.2 shows the histogram of this outcome variable at baseline. Williams (2016) mentions partial proportional odds or generalized ordered logit models as "superior alternative" in case of ordinal dependent variables as this model is less uncertain than proportional odds models.
Figure 3.2 Histogram of ordinal hypothetical lottery outcome at baseline
Fig. 3.3 (3a to 3c) shows the histogram of our count variables that indicates data are not normally distributed. 38 However, figures highlight overdispersion in the form of excess zeros (mean and variance are given under each figure).Observing overdispersion,39 we use a negative binomial model to explore the respondent's discount rates and willingness to take risks in day-to-day life (general risk-taking).Letting _ (.) represents the frequency distribution function (pdf) of a gamma function, the negative binomial model can be expressed as:
represents time. So, [ indicates the degree of impatience or willingness to take a risk during a specified exposure period, t. After exponentiation, model 16 can be rewritten as
Fig. 3a Discount rate (short horizon) Fig. 3b Discount rate (long horizon)
Figure 3.4 Histogram of respondents willingness to financial investment
is a controversial issue that has received substantial attention from the policymakers. Nearly half of the total population in Bangladesh are women of which 80
bring multiple beneficial effects on women's empowerment. First, it impacts positively on empowering women. For example, substantial positive impacts of unconditional cash transfer program are documented on Pakistani poorest women's decision-making power and empowerment(Amber & De Brauw, 2017). While assessing a similar kind of program in Zambia, Bonilla et al. (2017) highlight improvement in women's economic and intrahousehold condition. Second, several empirical studies indicate some mixed findings. For instance, mixed effects of conditional cash transfer program with female beneficiaries observed in Brazil;
Figure 4.1 that under this graduation model of TUP, the program provides soft loan and consumption support along with technical/enterprise development and life skill training, savings opportunity, and health and legal services to the main female of the households to move out of extreme poverty. After the intervention, the expected outcome includes an increase in income with involvement in diversified occupation, improvement in food security, savings, sustainable asset base, and hygiene and sanitation practices. Thereafter, if the graduation model works properly with the improvement in outcome variables, we assume that these diversified income opportunities and financial market participation would subsidize to the sustainable livelihoods and empowerment. The theory of change presents in Fig. 4.1
Figure 4.1 The way "Customized credit transfer" model works and impacts on women's empowerment: Theory of Change
Details of the indicators have been presented in AppendixTable C.1.
Customized Credit Transfer and Women's Empowerment: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Bangladesh
Customized Credit Transfer and Women's Empowerment: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Bangladesh
Agricultural and non-Agricultural self-employment increases significantly across all waves. Female children of the participant households are less likely to undertake unskilled work both relative to the boys in her household and all children in the nonparticipating households. This result suggests the effect of intervention in reducing gender gap in unskilled labour. Additionally, their involvement in Agri-and nonagricultural self-employment may offer opportunities to engage in economic activities to supplement family income while simultaneously attending school and eschew distress occupation. Our findings correspond to Del Carpio et al. (2016) which show that children of business grant recipient households are more likely to engage in skilled work to help their families diversifying their financial activities. The asset transfer program is successful in impacting the recipient children's occupational mobility (from unskilled to skilled occupation) and education in the longer term. Our study provides valuable insights that the asset transfer program expands the children's set of opportunities by enabling them to engage in Agriultural and non-agricultural self and skilled employment along with regular schooling in the medium and long run.
Impact on working days in different occupations of the children
3 Impact on education and personal income using the subsample
4 Impact on working days in different employment activities by gender of the p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All the regressions include a constant value and control for sub-districts fixed effects and a set of baseline demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. All outcomes are measured at the individual level.
5 Impact on employment by baseline activities for the children of both sexes(aged 5-16 years)
6 Correlation matrix between mothers' and children's employment activities (Pearson's correlation) p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
1 A brief review of the literature that use multidimensional approaches to measure empowerment
: ***, **, and * denote significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Average-Treatment-on-the-Treated (ATT) estimates are reported based on a differencein-difference specification estimated using multinomial logistic regression and reported the relative risk ratio (RRR). All the regressions include a constant value and control for districts fixed effects and a set of baseline demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. Standard errors in parentheses. We eliminate those households where only the women reside in the households (N=9935).
Treated (ATT) estimates are reported based on a difference-in-difference specification estimated using multinomial logistic regression and reported the relative risk ratio (RRR). All the regressions include a constant value and control for districts fixed effects and a set of baseline demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. We eliminate those households where only the women reside in the households (N=9935).
: ***, **, and * denote significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level respectively. Average-Treatment-onthe-Treated (ATT) estimates are reported based on a difference-in-difference specification estimated using logistic regression and reported odds ratio. Each column corresponds to a separate regression. All the regressions include a constant value and control for districts fixed effects and a set of baseline demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. Standard errors in parentheses. We eliminate those households where the women did not require any help from the neighbours and did not participate in the village religious court (Column 2 and column 3 respectively).
8 Impact on awareness about social and legal issues : ***, **, and * denote significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Average-Treatment-onthe-Treated (ATT) estimates are reported based on a difference-in-difference specification estimated using logistic regression and reported odds ratio. Each column corresponds to a separate regression. All the regressions include a constant value and control for districts fixed effects and a set of baseline demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. Standard errors in parentheses. Observations indicate the number of eligible women that are observed at baseline and follow-up survey waves.
ATT) estimates are reported based on a difference-in-difference specification estimated using OLS regression. The regression includes a constant value and control for districts fixed effects and a set of baseline demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. Standard errors in parentheses. Observations indicate the number of eligible women that are observed at baseline and follow-up survey waves.
BANGLADESH so for the girls. Our findings corroborate the Beckerian model of time allocation: in the short run, asset transfer expands the earning opportunities inducing substitution of study time for work, especially among the boys.
The second study explores whether the effect of the anti-poverty program extends beyond poverty reduction and improve economic decision-making. It examines the program impact on time preference and risk attitude in the financial domain and provides causal evidence of how an increase in wealth affects the intertemporal choice and risk aversion. This paper presents robust evidence that the program beneficiaries exhibit more patience, and risk tolerance than the nonbeneficiaries. These are consistent across various tools of elicitation and measures of time and risk preferences. These outcomes demonstrate an increase in income and wealth decrease absolute risk aversion, while increase risk tolerance, thus rejecting the constant absolute risk aversion (CARA) preference. In terms of policy implications, these findings provide empirical evidence that interventions designed to improve socio-economic conditions of the participants lead to more patience and more willingness to take risks, this is a significant, extra outcome of such interventions, with far-reaching consequences for their upcoming financial outcomes.
The third study examines whether the program enhances the women's ability to influence intra-household decision-making, communal cohesion, awareness for women's rights both within and outside of the household, competitiveness and selfconfidence -the much-needed behavioural traits among economically disenfranchised rural Bangladeshi women. Our empirical results show positively significant effects on enhancing sole and joint decision-making capabilities, social inclusion, and awareness about social and legal issues while domestic violence against women is likely to decrease after the intervention. These results provide some strong theoretical and empirical insights. From a policy point of view, the findings show that a well-targeted asset and credit transfer program may confer behavioural and personal benefits that accrue over and beyond what is measured in terms of income and consumption. vi UPLIFTING THE ULTRA POOR THROUGH TRANSFER PROGRAM: EVIDENCE FROM BANGLADESH Figure 3.1 Histogram of dichotomous outcome variables at baseline viii UPLIFTING THE ULTRA POOR THROUGH TRANSFER PROGRAM: EVIDENCE FROM BANGLADESH Table 1. 1 Eligibility criteria for the STUP and OTUP support packages ...................
Table 2.1 Impact on study of the children ..................................................................
Table 2.2 Impact on working days in different occupations of the children ..............
Table 2.3 Impact on education and personal income using the subsample ...............
Table 2.4 Impact on working days in different employment activities by gender of the children (intra-group) ........................................................................
Table 2.5 Impact on employment by baseline activities for the children of both sexes (aged 5-16 years) ................................................................................
Table 2.6 Correlation matrix between mothers' and children's employment activities (Pearson's correlation) ................................................................
Table 3.1 Impact on time preferences ........................................................................
Table 3.2 Impact on time preference (impatience) ....................................................
Table 3.3 Impact on present and future bias ..............................................................
Table 3.4 Impact on attitude towards risk ..................................................................
Table 3.5 Impact on risk preferences on financial investment ...................................
Table 4.1 A brief review of the literature that use multidimensional approaches to measure empowerment ...........................................................................
Table 4.2 Impact on influence in decision-making related to investment ................
Table 4.3 Impact on influence in decision-making related to credit and savings ....
Table 4.4 Impact on influence in decision-making related to children ....................
Table 4.5 Impact on influence in decision-making related to healthcare expenditure .................................................................................................
Table 4.6 Impact on women's overall empowerment ...............................................
Table 4.7 Impact on social inclusion .......................................................................
Table 4.8 Impact on awareness about social and legal issues .................................
Table 4.9 Impact on women's overall awareness ....................................................
Table 4.10 Impact on violence against women ........................................................
Table 4.11 Impact on competitiveness .....................................................................
Poverty is an artificial fact and, thus, is possible to eradicate. 1 A worldwide endeavour that includes multifarious disciplines is necessary to eliminate poverty (Cremin & Nakabugo, 2012) . Ample studies identify various grounds of poverty, for example, unemployment, lack of productive assets and credit, inequalities in income and labour market, insecure job etc.
which require efficient policies to combat poverty by creating employment opportunities, setting up minimum wage, and reducing labour market inequalities (Banerjee & Duflo, 2007; Dickens, 2015; Félix & Belo, 2019; Sotomayor, 2020; Varga, 2020; Zizzamia, 2020) .
Therefore, financial help and vocational training can change the poor's occupational preferences to better occupation and alleviate poverty (Banerjee & Newman, 1993; Bianchi & Bobba, 2013; Blattman et al., 2014) . Most anti-poverty programs around the world tackle poverty primarily through two instruments, firstly, providing productive capital in the form of microfinance, banking, asset or cash; and secondly, providing entrepreneurial skills such as vocational training, adult education. Since independence, Bangladesh has made remarkable progress in reducing abject poverty and achieved the status of a lower-middleincome country. Fig. 1 .1a shows the trends of poverty using a headcount method, demonstrating that despite the steady declines, a quarter of the population still lived below the upper poverty line and 13.8 per cent of these lived below the lower poverty line in 2016. 2
1 Nelson Mandela once said "Overcoming poverty is not a task of charity; it is an act of justice. Like Slavery and Apartheid, poverty is not natural. It is man-made and it can be overcome and eradicated by the actions of human beings". (Part of a speech given By Nelson Mandela at the launching of the 'Make Poverty History' campaign in Trafalgar Square, London, UK in 2005. Available at: http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/politics/4232603.stm ) 2 Since 1995-96, Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS) uses Cost of Basic Needs (CBN) method to measure the lower and upper poverty lines. Households whose total consumption expenditure is approximately equal or below to their food poverty line (consume 2122 kcal per person/per day) are known as the lower poverty line while households whose food consumption expenditure is approximately equal to their food poverty line are known as the upper poverty line.
Likewise, using three non-income dimensions (education, health, living standards), Fig. 1 .1b presents a similar picture in terms of the trend in the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI), which has declined from 0.292 in 2007 to 0.104 in 2019 (OPHI, 2011; 2020) . 3 However, about 39 million people are still deprived of any or all of the above-mentioned three dimensions of poverty as of 2019 (OPHI, 2020) . Figure 1.1 Poverty trends using unidimensional and multidimensional space Source: BBS (2016); OPHI (2011; 2017; 2020) Figure 1.
2 illustrates the existing approaches that have been implemented around the world by the development practitioners to move the poor out of poverty. As can be seen from the figure, the cash or asset transfer programs target the destitute, extreme poor and moderate poor while conventional microcredit and livelihood development programs target the moderate poor, vulnerable non-poor and non-poor. It is visible from the figure that microcredit programs target those who are less poor and less vulnerable than those who are 3 The Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) is based upon the methodology of Alkire and Foster to measure multiple dimensions of human well-being and seeks to measure acute poverty across several non-income dimensions designed by the Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative (OPHI) and UNDP. The MPI includes 10 indicators (two education, two health, and six living standards indicators) under three dimensions where each dimension is equally weighted and each indicator under a dimension is also equally weighted. The MPI provides a poverty headcount and an intensity measure of multidimensional poverty; the overall MPI score is calculated by multiplying the poverty headcount by the intensity measure. The MPI score lies between 0 and 1 where the higher score denotes higher poverty/deprivations (OPHI, 2011; 2017; 2020) . and long-lasting effects of the asset and cash transfer programs on livelihoods and asset accumulation of the very poor (Blattman et al., 2014 (Blattman et al., , 2016;; Banerjee et al., 2015a; Bandiera et al., 2016; Phadera et al., 2019) . 4 Ample studies document positive effects of microfinance on poverty reduction, scaling up human capital, business profits, households asset, risk management capability, and nutritional status (Pitt & Khandker, 1998; Morduch & Haley, 2002; Mosley & Rock, 2004; Félix & Belo, 2019; Hossain & Wadood, 2020) . Though microfinance program has been assumed as an anti-poverty tool, numerous studies argue that microfinance effects are mostly mixed with less efficient to reach out the bottom layer of the poorer clients (Morduch, 1999; Hashemi & Rosenberg, 2006; Dichter & Harper, 2007; Bateman & Chang, 2009; Karlan & Zinman, 2011; Banerjee et al., 2015b) . However, Mosley and Hume (1998) elucidate that microfinance impact is dependent on the design of the scheme such as savings opportunity, repayment system, and incentive plans for the borrowers. That is why, several authors pointed out the necessities of adding additional supports such as savings opportunity, training, monitoring, safety planning, and communal networks with microfinance to better protect the participants and to successfully use the loan (Karlan & Valdivia, 2011; Dahal & Fiala, 2020; Debnath et al., 2019; Matjasko et al., 2020 ).
4 BRAC is the pioneer of the transfer program also known as graduation program that targets those who are living below the poverty line, includes direct transfers of income generating livestock assets/loan and livelihood training. Since its inception in 2002, it reaches around 1.77 million extreme poor households covering 50 of 64 districts of Bangladesh. Banerjee et al. (2015a) and Bandiera et al. (2016) studied the asset transfer program.
Figure 1.2 Existing approaches to meet the needs of the poor (modified the model, originally developed by de Montesquiou et al., 2014) Given the evidence that the bottom layer of the poorer clients are bypassed by the conventional microfinance, and transfer programs have large positive effects, in addition to the asset transfer program, this study evaluates whether a combination of directed policies can achieve better outcomes. In other words, whether an intervention that blends the extension of credit and additional support (such as training, stipend, health subsidy) is an effective instrument for the reduction of extreme poverty, rather than only grant or only credit. BRAC, one of the largest NGOs in the world, innovates an anti-poverty program titled "Targeting the Ultra poor (TUP)" program that provides credit with additional support along with the grant-based asset transfer program. Thus, this study estimates the effectiveness of the TUP program which was first implemented in Bangladesh in 2002 to reduce extreme poverty. The program implements two intervention packages: (1) Specially Targeted Ultra Poor (STUP) package -a grant-based support package that transfers asset as a grant, and (2) Other Targeted Ultra Poor (OTUP) package -a credit plus grant-based support package that provides a loan. Under both support packages, the program provides training, a consumption subsidy, and some inputs to maintain the income-generating activities to the Specially Targeted Ultra Poor and Other Targeted Ultra Poor along with assets or loan. The focuses of my studies are on both support packages that adopt randomized control trial implementation design. Since the program is targeted to the main female of the household, it could potentially affect the economic and behavioural outcomes for both the recipients and their children. These impacts may be in the form of changes in (i) children's time allocation to education and income-generating activities, (ii) own preferences that matter for economic decision-making, and (iii) the control of intrahousehold decision-making, self-esteem and self-confidence. This thesis explores these three domains on a unique sample or individuals in extreme poverty. Therefore, the first paper is based on the grant-based asset transfer program and the rest two papers are based on the customized credit transfer program.
In 1972, the Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee (BRAC) was founded in Bangladesh to empower people and communities under poverty and fight against illiteracy, disease and social injustice through large scale interventions. So far, BRAC has reached the lives of an estimated 100 million people. Despite 30 years of very effective and scalable intervention programmes, for example in microfinance, education, livelihoods, and health, water and sanitation, the conditions of the ultra-poor households improved too little to reduce extreme poverty at the end of the 20 th century. To this end, BRAC started implementing the Targeting the Ultra Poor (TUP) program that included direct transfers of income-generating livestock assets as a grant for the poorest -that is, those living below the lower poverty line since 2002. 5 This innovative 'Graduation' approach that combines the components of social safety nets, livelihoods, social integration and financial inclusion 5 The TUP program is supported by BRAC's core funds and funds from donor agencies and organizations worldwide. Major donors include Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) of UK, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) of Australia, and Global Affairs of Canada (GAC).
operates for two years where each of this component grabs distinct parts of extreme poverty. 6 Multidimensional supports that include subsistence allowance, asset transfers, life skills and technical skills training, community mobilisation and health care support, coaching on positive behaviour change, and savings opportunities to meet immediate needs of the participants are provided under the program (Fig. 1 .3). 7 However, conventional development programs are not able to cope up with these multidimensional needs. The program was first piloted in three northern districts (Rangpur, Kurigram, and Nilphamari) of Bangladesh in 2002 and then scaled up across the country. Around 100,000
ultra poor households were covered in its first phase (2002) (2003) (2004) (2005) (2006) of implementation from the rural areas of Bangladesh. Productive assets such as livestock and poultry along with a 6 For this holistic intervention to move the extreme poor out of poverty, the graduation approach has now been well recognized around the globe and adapted by 114 programs in 45 countries by government and nongovernment organizations in the world's most poverty concentrated areas. 7 http://www.brac.net/images/index/tup/brac_TUP-briefNote-Jun17.pdf daily allowance and training to the women were provided as grants to sustainably improve the financial condition of the ultra poor households. Evaluation of the first phase of the program was conducted using non-experimental methodology because program participants were compared to a similar but non-random group of non-participants. A substantial body of literature documents the significantly positive impact of the intervention on the livelihood and asset accumulation of the ultra poor households (Emran et al., 2014; Krishna et al., 2012) . Based on these empirical and promising findings, BRAC expanded coverage, incorporated diversity in program support, and introduced second phase (2007) (2008) (2009) (2010) (2011) with two intervention packages: (1) Specially Targeted Ultra poor (STUP), and ( 2 ) Other Targeted Ultra poor (OTUP) packages. The STUP package generally targets the ultra poor who are relatively more vulnerable than those targeted by the OTUP package. All the interventions are directed through the main female member of the household.
The second phase (2007) (2008) (2009) (2010) (2011) of the program adopts a randomized controlled trial (RCT) in the implementation design only for the STUP support package. 8 Non-experimental evaluation design has been adopted in Phase III (2012) (2013) (2014) (2015) (2016) . And in phase IV (2016) (2017) (2018) (2019) (2020) , again the program adopts a randomized controlled trial in the implementation design for both STUP and OTUP support packages. My first paper is based on the STUP support package of the TUP program (phase II), and the second and third papers are based on the OTUP support package of the TUP program (phase IV). The selection procedure of the eligible households and their support packages are described below.
The program follows a three-step procedure to select the ultra poor. Initially, the poorest sub-districts are identified from the poverty map of the World Food Program (BBS & WFP, 2004) . From the selected sub-districts, villages that have a higher intensity of poverty is determined based on the knowledge of the TUP program staff or discussion with the staff of other BRAC programs, for example, education, health, microfinance so forth. Thereafter, a participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) exercise is carried out at the starting in the selected villages and drawn a large map of the village during the process (Chambers, 1994) . All the landmarks and households in each of the village are identified to capture all the households, including those who are indistinguishable families or households residing inside others' houses like on their balconies or even mobile. After identifying all the households, they are divided into clusters that include 80-120 households and carried out the wealth ranking exercise. All the identified households in each community are ranked into 5-6 wealth groups (e.g., very poor, poor, lower-middle-class, upper-middle-class, and non-poor).
Subsequently, households from the bottom three wealth groups are visited and verified by the program staff to select households eligible for the STUP and OTUP support packages based on the selection criteria (Table 1 .1) specified by the program. The eligibility criteria, developed by BRAC through its extensive experience, were specified in the TUP program to identify the households in various classes of socioeconomic vulnerability. The program targets those who have little or no land or productive assets and simultaneously struggle to cope up with the shortage of basic security and entitlement including that of food security, public health, and social honour. Most of the cases, they are being excluded from the basic supports such as healthcare and social benefits and are often unable to work due to chronic sicknesses or disability. During verification, female-headed households where the main women are widow, divorced, or separated are given special efforts to ensure their active participation. Though the overall aim of the intervention is to enhance the wellbeing of all family members, the program support is provided to the main female member of the chosen household.
The program uses two exclusion criteria in addition to the inclusion criteria discussed above. One of them is that, if the households do not have adult females who are capable of working are excluded as the program support is given to the main female of the households.
Government/NGO support or a member of microfinance are excluded to prevent duplications. To be eligible for the STUP and OTUP support package, a household must satisfy at least three of the above mentioned five inclusion criteria and none of the exclusion criteria. 9 Due to flexibility in the selection criteria -households meeting at least three of the above-mentioned criteria were selected for the program, there are no practical difficulties in implementing the selection criteria and the beneficiaries of the STUP and OTUP packages are mutually exclusive.
Table 1.1 Eligibility criteria for the STUP and OTUP support packages STUP Package OTUP Package 1 Household owns <10 decimals of land Household owns ≤30 decimals of land 2 School-going age (5-14 years) children are engaged in income-generating activities. Unable to bear children's educational expenses beyond the primary level 3 Household owns no productive assets Household is mainly dependent on an irregular income 4 Household is mainly dependent on the main female member's irregular earning (from working as day labourer, housemaid, begging so forth).
History of failure to make successful use of NGO support in the past 5 Has no male members capable of working Fail to avail either fish or meat or eggs in the last three consecutive days
Once the selections are made, the program provides the eligible STUP households with (1) enterprise development and life skill training; (2) asset -mostly livestock and poultry with an average value of USD 140 which is a one-shot transfer;
(3) a weekly subsistence allowance (around USD 2.6) for the period of the first 36-40 weeks to reimburse for any income losses that might occur due to the eligible woman's change in the occupation; (4) health subsidies (BRAC bears health expenses for the household members and provides micronutrient sachets); and (5) community mobilization support. However, the OTUP support package provides almost the same supports except asset. Instead of transferring asset as a grant, the eligible OTUP households receive a soft loan where the interest rate is low (20 per cent) and get the opportunity to pay the instalment after two months of receiving the loan. The STUP and OTUP participants are primarily provided with practical training on income-generating activities such as livestock rearing and cow fattening, after which the participants get the assets/loan. The type of support transferred to each participant depends on their enthusiasm and ability to involve in the associated income-generating activities (IGAs). The program delivers enterprise development training to the participants so that they can properly utilize the transferred assets. Close supervision of the participant in individual and group settings is also provided through the front line staff (known as Program Organizers) on their economic growth and health conditions. 10 This enables the participants to develop sustainable livelihoods because regular monitoring support motivates the participants' to use the assets for IGAs and improves their entrepreneurial skill. Weekly home visits for providing continuous coaching on general awareness about social and health issues and positive behaviour change continue for two years as well. 11 Additionally, livestock specialists visit the beneficiaries households on a monthly or bi-monthly basis for the first year. Some additional inputs such as fodder for livestock are also given them with.
Given the evidence that asset transfer program of TUP has long-lasting impacts on livelihoods and asset accumulation of the ultra poor (Banerjee et al., 2015a; Bandiera et al., 2016; Blattman et al., 2016; Phadera et al., 2019) , effects of such program on occupational mobility of the grant recipient's children are largely lacking. Per beneficiary's cost for the asset transfer program i.e. STUP support package is around $550 to $600 whereas the cost is around $350 for the credit plus approach i.e. OTUP support package. In addition to looking at the grant recipient women's children's occupational mobility, this study also aims to explore whether the less costly credit plus approach is effective in changing behaviours of the ultra poor women in terms of intertemporal choice, risk aversion, influence in household important decision-making. To date, to my knowledge, study on the effectiveness of the customized credit plus approach on human preferences and women's empowerment are largely missing, although several studies document the effects of microfinance with compulsory and voluntary savings opportunity, and flexible repayment system (Dowla & Alamgir, 2003; Field et al., 2012; Fiala, 2013; Shonchoy & Kuroshaki, 2014; Bruno & Khachatryan, 2020) .
Thus, in this study, I aim to explore 1. how does grant-based asset transfer program impact on study and work of the ultra poor children in the long run?
11 Issues include children's education, early childhood marriage and dowry, marriage registration, food nutrition, and anaemia, human trafficking, waterborne diseases, domestic violence, disaster preparedness, family planning, de-worming, non-communicable diseases, and immunisation.
Child labour is an intricate issue, which has drawn perceptual attention from underdeveloped nations. Though ample evidence has been documented on pertinent factors that are responsible for child labour, poverty is the most common one (Pais et al., 2017) . 12 An estimated 120 million children aged 5-14 years are involved in some form of work in the Asia Pacific region and countries with annual per capita income of $500 or less (World Bank, 1998; ILO, 2013) . Child labour is prevalent in developing countries due to the consequence of poverty, vulnerability, and economic shocks (Krueger, 1996; Fallon & Tzannatos, 1998; Edmonds & Pavcnik, 2005; Beegle et al., 2006; Duryea et al., 2007; Edmonds, 2008; Dillon, 2013; Landmann & Frolich, 2015; Bandara et al., 2015; Sarkar & Sarkar, 2016) . Bangladesh is not an exception; statistics show about 4.7 million children aged 5-14 (12.6 per cent) are in the workforce. A vast majority of them (93 per cent) work in the informal sectors that are outside the purview of the labour laws -such as small factories and workshops, home businesses and domestic employment, and in the streets. 13 Numerous studies elucidate substantial adverse effects of child labour on academic achievement, school attendance, human capital accumulation (Heady, 2003; Rosati & Rossi, 2003; Beegle et al., 2005; Gunnarsson et al., 2006) , adult incomes (Ilahi et al., 2000; Kassouf et al., 2001; Emerson & Souza, 2011) , and potentially hazardous occupations and undesirable physical, intellectual, and mental health outcomes as an adult (Kassouf et al., 12 American Social Worker & Child Labour Reformer Director, Children's Bureau, U.S. Grace Abbott states, "child labour and poverty are inevitably bound together, and if you continue to use the labour of children as the treatment for the social disease of poverty, you will have both poverty and child labour to the end of time". 13 https://www.unicef.org/bangladesh/children_4863.html 14Chapter 2: Like Mother Like Daughter? Occupational Mobility among Children under the Asset Transfer Program 2001; Lee & Orazem, 2007; Radfar et al., 2018) . Mounting evidence spotlight market imperfection and income inequality generate persistent child labour (Baland & Robinson, 2000; Ranjan, 2001; Rogers & Swinnerton, 2001; Dessy & Vencatachellum, 2003; Sarkar & Sarkar, 2016) . In contrary, several authors pointed out the importance of focusing on issues beyond absolute poverty (Canagarajah & Coulombe, 1997; Swaminathan, 1998; Kambhampati & Rajan, 2006) . Thus, Sarkar and Sarkar (2016) draw attention to not only focusing on income inequality as a means for 'transmission of child labour' but also on high schooling cost and low health investment. In their study, they demonstrate the fact that poverty has little to do with the persistence of child labour because if it was true for the developing countries like India, where many millions have come out of poverty, would have seen a substantial decrease in child labour.
Different social protection programs, for example, conditional cash transfer (CCTs) program have been implemented around the world to reduce child labour and promote schooling. This is mainly because the incidence of school dropout at an earlier age is higher among families with lower incomes and less productive assets (Jacoby, 1994) . However, participation in distinct social protection program brings multiple salutary effects on children. First, it impacts positively on school attendance and child labour. For example, an empirical study by Ravallion and Wodon (2000) reveals that the Food for Education Program (FEE) in Bangladesh increases school attendance with a small decrease in child labour. Similar findings are noted by Schultz (2004) and Miller and Tsoka (2012) using randomized experiment data of the Mexican Progresa poverty program and Malawi cash transfer program, respectively. However, the conditional cash transfer program in Nicaragua influences on the capacity and value of child labour, precisely, the program has trimmed down child labour for agricultural and household activities whereas improved it for non-agricultural work interrelated to business (Del Carpio et al., 2016) . De hoop and Rosati (2014 Theoharides (2020) also document negative effect of the asset transfer to the household with child labour; they show transfer increases the younger children's involvement to work, even they were not involved in work before intervention.
Even though both positive and negative effects are well documented, several empirical studies indicate some mixed findings. For instance, Maluccio and Flores (2005) in Nicaragua, Skoufias and Parker (2001) in Mexico, and Filmer and Schady (2009) in Combodia discover reduction of work among children. Likewise, Borraz and González (2009) observe a reduction in female child labour in Montevideo, but no impact on school attendance. On the other hand, Cardoso and Souza (2004) demonstrate an increase of student enrolment in Brazil with no differences in child labour that corresponds to the study conducted by Attanasio et al. (2010) , Glewwe and Olinto (2004) . Amarante et al. (2011) expose no effect on school attendance, child labour, or household income in Uruguay. Due to the existing mixed findings and uncertainty, however, the relationship between transfer programs and child labour is still questionable, explicitly at the micro-level.
Though conditional cash transfer program aims to invest in children's human capital (Fiszbein & Schady, 2009) , this program is not effective enough to promote regular schooling and reduce child labour may be due to small transfers which are not adequate to skip the labour (Cardoso & Souza, 2004; McGuire, 2013) . This argument is supported by the fact that child labour earnings are higher than the benefits (Schultz, 2004) . Limited duration and a lower amount of grant are not enough to keep the children in attending school, instead driven to the workplace (Lee & Hwang, 2016) . Research on positive effects of the cash and asset transfer programs on income, employment of the adult member, food security, food consumption, productive assets, psychological status, accessing and using of health services, and school enrolment of the children are voluminous (Barrientos & DeJong, 2004; Hulme & Moore, 2007; Krishna et al., 2012; Emran et al., 2014; Banerjee et al., 2015a; Bauchet et al., 2015; Bandiera et al., 2016; Gobin et al., 2017; Bauchet et al., 2018; Phadera et al., 2019) . Few studies assess the impact of a randomized asset transfer program on study and occupational mobility of the children of grant recipient women. Sulaiman The results elucidate that the average study time of children aged 5-8 years increases when measured over seven years, although it decreases in the first two years of the intervention. However, the effect is statistically significant for boys only. We do not find any significant effect of asset transfer on children's years of schooling and school drop-out behaviour in any wave. The likelihood of adopting self-employment increases significantly both for boys and girls in the program households across all waves. Results of gender effects on working days in different occupations of the children demonstrate that the asset transfer program seems to play a salient role in reducing the gender gap as girls are less likely to involve in unskilled work than not only boys of the treatment households but also both boys and girls of the control households. Further, their involvement in Agri-and non-agricultural self-work may offer opportunities to stay away from distress occupation. Our findings correspond to Becker's model i.e. an increase in income opportunities lead to decrease the educational opportunities and later, the associated increase in income would expand the educational opportunities that were reduced earlier. Evidence shows that the children in the treated households are likely to engage in economic activities to supplement the family income while simultaneously attending school. This study contributes to the literature by providing insights on how asset transfer affects the nature of children's economic activities and time allocation between child labour and schooling.
The remainder of chapter two is organized as follows. Section 2 and 3 describe the conceptual framework on how asset transfer program affects child labour, and experimental design, respectively. Section 4 presents the descriptive statistics of the outcome variables and section 5 discusses the short, medium, and long-run results of the evaluation. Section 6 concludes.
18Chapter 2: Like Mother Like Daughter? Occupational Mobility among Children under the Asset Transfer Program
To fix ideas, it is helpful to understand the theoretical underpinnings of how an exogenous uncompensated increase in income, like the STUP support package, affects the intrahousehold time allocation decisions. Households operate as a micro-enterprise where production and consumption decisions are made simultaneously (Becker, 1965) . On the one hand, the increase in asset and training expands the income-generating opportunities, which increases the opportunity costs of schooling and leisure for the potential working members of the household. This is the substitution effect. On the other hand, higher potential income expands the set of production possibilities, enabling superior consumption bundles of all goods. The net effect depends on the relative strength of these two effects, which cannot be predicted a priori. The model below follows Becker's seminal work on the allocation of time (Becker, 1965) to illustrate the prediction of a simplified model. Suppose the households maximize a utility function
where Zi's are 'activities' produced using two inputs -time (Ti) and market purchased goods (xi), according to the production function Zi = fi (xi, Ti), i = {1, 2, 3}. In the present context, Z1 denotes educational activities of children (attending school, completing homework, etc.); Z2 denotes wealth-generating activities, while Z3 captures joint leisure activities of the family members.
The households maximize (1) subject to a goods budget constraint and a time budget constraint. The goods budget constraint is given by
where pi is a vector of unit prices of xi, Tw is a vector of work hours and . / is the vector of the hourly wage rate. The time constraint is given by: ∑ , # = , 0 = 1 -, -
where , 0 is a vector of total time spent at consumption, and the total time endowment is normalized to unit. Also, assume that it takes a constant amount of goods (3 # ) and time (4 # )
to produce each unit of Z, so that , # ≡ 4 # 6 # and $ # ≡ 3 # 6 # . This allows us to rewrite (2) as:
If . / was constant across activities, the expression . / 4 # 6 # would represent the loss in earning due to the time used-up in producing Zi. Let L denote total earning 'lost' by the interest in utility, and let S denote 'full income'. Then: L(Z1, Z2, Z3) ≡ S -I(Z1, Z2, Z3), or using ( 2 ),
Since activities are not equally intensive in time and goods input, it is worthwhile to conceptualize the division of loss from an activity between two components -one due to allocation of goods and the other resulting from allocation of time. Thus,
where
and H # = AB AF D are marginal foregone income due to using more time and goods, respectively, on Zi. The equilibrium condition resulting from the maximization of (1) subject to resource constraint (4) is therefore given by:
Given the nature of the activities, it seems reasonable that the marginal importance of forgone earnings is not symmetric across activities and is likely to be the highest for Z1
(educational activities of children), and lowest for Z2 (wealth generating activities).
Therefore, an uncompensated rise in income due to, say, increased returns to work hours, will change the relative prices of Zi. In general, the prices of Zi that is relatively more intensive in forgone earning (Z1 and Z3 in this case) will rise more. The households would be inclined to substitute the more expensive Z1 and Z3 by the less expensive Z2.
The asset transfer program provides support to the main female of the households for their financial upliftment. Thus, the program mainly directs on economic aspects of the beneficiaries, such as how the asset could be expanded, how new income sources can be generated, how to manage the daily income, etc. For that, the program provides some support services through the Program Organizers (PO) who consistently push them to invest their income to productive sectors like leasing in land for cultivation or starting up a new
business to diversify income opportunities. As already mentioned, several studies demonstrate the success of the program in those economic aspects. Moreover, as school attendance is not a direct component of the asset transfer program, in this study, we will not focus on that. This study concentrates on whether this financial improvement has any effect on time allocation of child labour and schooling among the children of grant recipient women. We are not too ambitious to assume that economic gain would abolish child labour. 14 Thus, we expect that it would improve their nature of work as mixed effects of the conditional cash and asset transfer program observe on child labour in several studies.
Family's improved socioeconomic conditions help children's development that contributes to ending child labour (Pais et al., 2017) . Bandara et al. (2015) find that an increase in the family's access to credit and assets reduce the child's time allocation on paid or unpaid work. However, evidence illustrates that health insurance reduces economic vulnerability and that significantly decreases child labour on risky jobs and earnings in Pakistan (Landmann & Fr ölich, 2015) . While Beegle et al. (2006; 2003) show that the prevalence of using child labour is higher among the credit-constrained households to smooth their income, and household's access to credit in response to crop shocks are likely to reduce child labour and increase household welfare.
On the other hand, several authors claim that increasing household access to credit market leads to reduction or delayed school enrolment, and coincidental consequences of child labour (Wydick, 1999; Menon, 2004; Shimamura & Lastarria-Cornhiel, 2010; Augsburg et al., 2012; Lakdawala, 2018) . 15 Increased access to financial market improves food security and enables the households to start up new business activities that prefer child 14 Abundant literature reveals that financial improvement refrain to diminish child labour instead it creates demand for it (Swaminathan, 1998; Kambhampati & Rajan, 2006; Dammert et al., 2018) . 15 Lakdawala (2018) finds that households in the middle of the wealth distribution become involved in the business after getting access to credit that concurrently increases their use of child labour, but no effect observes on school attendance or dropout rates.
labour considering future income fluctuations, and therefore education becomes less important (Fumagalli & Martin, n.d.) . Becker (1962) mentions that younger human capitals are more desirable for long run investment. In a perfect labour market, positive effect on wealth due to asset grant may reduce child labour; however, the opposite may be expected in case of the imperfect market (Edmonds & Theoharides, 2020) . Because imperfect labour and financial markets, fluctuations in seasonal earnings, and sudden shocks affect schooling (Jacoby & Skoufias, 1997; Edmonds et al., 2010) ; these lead to an increase in child labour (Ranjan, 2001; Beegle et al., 2003; Beegle et al., 2005; Dillon, 2013) . In this regard, Edmonds (2008) highlights a U-shaped correlation between child labour and female power in the household. This is re-examined by Ray and Basu (2002) in Nepal and indicates that when the power of a woman increases, it leads to preliminary fall of child labour, but beyond a point, it leads to increase again.
Thus, we assume that increased asset and income of the TUP beneficiaries may affect their children in three ways: it would affect the (1) nature of work of the children i.e.
keep the children away from distress occupation, or (2) volume of child labour within households i.e. use the children to substitute or complement mother's work, or (3) nature and quality of work that varies with gender. 16 However, no study has focused on the volume and nature of work of the children of ultra poor households where the mother receives a grant under the asset transfer program of TUP in the longer run. 16 Distress occupations that have less social values like a day labourer, maid, beggar, etc.
This study uses four rounds of panel data of BRAC's TUP program collected in 2007 , 2009 , 2011 , and 2014 by the Research and Evaluation Division (RED) of BRAC. 17 This is the second phase of the TUP program, and we choose this cohort as a Randomized Controlled Trial (RCT) has been adopted in the implementation of the program. The experimental design is presented in Fig 2.2. Data were collected from 20 sub-districts that cover 13 poorest districts of Bangladesh. 18 Within each sub-district, villages were identified in discussion with the field-level BRAC staff and selected at least two branches of which each was randomly assigned as treated or control branch. 19 Therefore, the survey was conducted in 40 branches (20 treatment and 20 control branches) and 1309 villages. Eligible selected households of treated branches receive program support while eligible selected households of control branches will not offer any program support. The average distance between the treatment and control branch is around 12 km. Villages within the same sub-district are subject to experience similar local policies and local governance At baseline, 7,953 eligible households were surveyed, and the attrition rate is about 22 per cent after seven years of intervention. 20 Using the same but three years of panel data, Bandiera et al. (2016) show that the attrition rate was 15 per cent after four years of intervention and that does not vary among treatment and control groups. 21 Further, we add Appendix
Table A.2 and A.3 illustrating that attrition occurs randomly among the treatment and control group. Almost similar level of socioeconomic status observes among the attrited and non attrited households of treatment and control groups.
This study assesses the longer-term effects of the TUP on child labour using four rounds pooled panel data that include only those households where the same main female respondents were surveyed in all the waves 22 and the respondents have at least one child age 5-16 years. 23 Thus, the evaluation sample includes 2475, 2622, 2642, and 2653 households 20 Banerjee et al. (2015a) in such kind of asset transfer program find 17 per cent and 21 per cent attrition in India and Pakistan, respectively. 21 The study focuses on livelihoods and asset accumulation of the eligible women. 22 To reduce the attrition rate, research assistants were instructed to collect household information from another adult female (for example respondent's daughter or daughter in law) of the household if the main respondent is absent or died during the survey. If respondent changes, we eliminate these households from our analysis. 23 We choose 5 to 16 years children instead of 5 to 14 years with the aim to grasp the baseline's youngest children (whose age was 5-8 years at baseline) until the end-line survey. Their maximum age would be 12-16 years after 7 years post intervention. To check robustness, we conduct the same exercise for 5 to 14 years children as well, and find similar results (available upon request) in 2007, 2009, 2011, and 2014 , respectively, that covers 979, 1018, 1018, and 996 communities. 24 Therefore, we measure the impact of the TUP program on child labour on only the finally selected (at baseline) respondents' kids-Intent-to-treat (ITT). 25 The respondent was the main woman in the household.
Further, we conduct power calculation (to check whether we have enough sample to achieve minimum effect size) and draw one-sided hypothesis tests assuming a decline in child labour instead of the commonly used two-sided hypothesis testing. During power calculations, we follow the social sciences convention and apply a significance level of 0.05 for the probability of Type I error and power of 0.8 for the probability of avoiding Type II error. We assume a one-sided test and an intra-cluster correlation of 0.2 compatible with the RCTs based studies in the areas of education (Hedges & Hedberg, 2007; Edmonds & Theoharides, 2020) . About 13.6 per cent of children in Bangladesh were engaged in hazardous forms of child labour in 2007, and we anticipate a 30 per cent decrease in the incidence of unsafe child labour implying a sample of 480 children from 40 branches, 12 children per branch. 26 Our sample is larger than the 480 children with 17,450 children (10,877 treated and 6,573 control) across the four waves. 24 Evaluation sample include 4034, 4340, 4426, and 4650 children in 2007, 2009, 2011, and 2014, respectively. Sample by treatment status are presented in Appendix Table A.5. 25 As mentioned, the RCT technique was followed in designing the study, but that is not intact fully anymore.
After the second follow up survey in 2011, the TUP program provides support to some of the ultra-poor households in the control branches as well. In total, 495 households have received the TUP program support after 2011 in the control areas. As a substantial number of households are still unaffected in the control group and we are estimating ITT effects, these 495 households are also considered as control. 26 Edmonds and Theoharides (2020) anticipate a 50 per cent decline of child labour as the transfer of the program was conditional upon reducing/eliminating child labour. In our study, the program's focus is on economic improvement. That is why we assume that it would be too ambitious to anticipate that households' financial improvement would reduce 50 per cent of child labour.
Using experimental panel data, this study assesses the impact of the asset transfer program of TUP on the dynamics of intra-household time allocation between study and work of the respondents' children (aged 5 to 8 years at baseline and currently enrolled in school).
Despite randomization, our models control for the baseline demographic and socioeconomic characteristics such as household size, age of the child, per capita income, education and employment status of the mother/respondent, sex of the household head, number of children and working age adults in the households, ownership of land, livestock and savings, to control for any compositional differences in the sampled children of ultra poor households.
We use the individual fixed-effects model to control for the numerous observed and unobserved individual characteristics that could affect child labour. Therefore, any changes among the treatment and control households at follow-up that is in the short (after two years of intervention) and long-run (after four or seven years of intervention) might then be inferred as causal effects of the intervention. For each of the outcomes, we offer impact estimates for all children combined and stratified by gender to reveal the precise effects for both treatment and control groups.
Thus, our measure of child labour compares reported working days in the last year of the children of program participant versus non-participant households using the differencein-difference technique. We estimate the following linear difference-in-differences model for each outcome J #KLM of child N measured in subdistrict O at time t (2007 baseline (t = 0) and followed up in 2009, 2011, 2014 (t = 1, 2, 3)) who report being primarily engaged in activity j (j = household chores, study, agricultural self-employment, non-agricultural skilled work, and unskilled work):
Where R #KM is a dummy variable denoting child of program participant household N.
T denotes survey waves and the parameter S identifies the intent-to-treat impact of the program. X represents a vector of children's age, mother's and household characteristics at baseline (i.e., in 2007); X K are subdistrict fixed effects that capture the geographical heterogeneity. Summary statistics of control variables are presented in Panel B of Appendix Table A.1. We do not control for the time-variant household attributes as these may hypothetically be influenced by the intervention. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the individual level. We classify the various employment choices into five activities: household chores, study, agricultural self-employment (cultivation, livestock rearing, fishing, vegetable gardening, and nursery), non-agricultural skilled employment (skilled carpenters, skilled blacksmiths, garments workers, health workers, tailoring, handicrafts, and small business); and unskilled employment (agricultural or non-agricultural day labourer, work as maids/servants). Panel A and Panel B of Appendix Table A.4 shows the unconditional total study time and working days in different occupations of the children of treatment and control households across four waves in last one year.
We assume the TUP to have a heterogeneous impact on child labour by gender and baseline occupation of the children. Firstly, we hypothesize whether the child labour scenario is more pronounced among female children. Therefore, to measure the heterogeneous impact of TUP on this, we use the following triple differenced model. If we would estimate difference-in-difference to explore whether child labour is higher among the female children compared to male children, we would miss out the impact of the program.
Thus, Model 8 allows us to identify the causal impact of TUP on the outcomes of interest.
Where Z is a dummy variable denoting the child is female. The parameter S is the doubledifference estimator with triple interaction of the average effect of the program.
Secondly, our hypothesize is that children of program participant households who were involved in skilled or unskilled work at baseline will, therefore, be more likely to remain in or shift to skilled jobs in the long run. As studies show that grant recipient women turn to more entrepreneurial activities in the short, medium, and longer-term (Bandiera et al., 2016) , we assume that it would affect the children engaging in a better occupation like skilled self-employment rather than unskilled work like day labouring, maid, begging, etc.
To assess the impact of the program on time allocation of child labour by baseline employment, we estimate the regression models separately for each subgroup.
This section reports the changes in key indicators on education, income, and employment status for the children of treatment and control households during baseline to end-line survey in two forms. Using the pooled panel, first, we present the changes to these indicators for the children aged 5 to 16 years (Fig. 2 .3 -2.5), followed by the changes for a sub-group of the children aged 5 to 8 years at baseline i.e. in 2007 and currently enrolled in school (Figs.
2.6 -2.8). Notably, for the former group, several young children (who have born after baseline or first follow up) age 5 or 6 years are there in the second (2011) and third followup (2014) survey. These results would not give us the true impact of the intervention on the treated children's occupational mobility from baseline to end-line survey. Considering that, the sub-group is chosen to look at how and in which occupations these younger kids spend their time after the intervention. This is because they were the youngest children at baseline and their maximum age will be 16 years until the last round of survey (i.e., in 2014). A substantial body of literature argues that early childhood is a critical period for human development that "shape the lifetime skill", and financial support at an earlier stage affects highly (Heckman & Mosso, 2014; Attanasio et al., 2017; Almond et al., 2018) . For instance, mounting evidence demonstrates that the effects of CCTs are higher among the children receiving the support at a younger age relative to those who receive the support at a later age (Attanasio et al., 2017; Duque et al., 2018; Attanasio et al., 2019) . By showing the changes over time for the full sample and subgroup of treatment and control, we explore whether there are any differences across the children in the treated and control household.
Descriptive statistics for the earlier group display that school dropout rates have been decreased sharply for the children of both treatment and control households over the year where the rate is a little bit lower for the children of treatment households (17.6 per cent)
against control (18.3 per cent) at the end-line survey i.e. in 2014 (Fig. 3a ). This indicates 30Chapter 2: Like Mother Like Daughter? Occupational Mobility among Children under the Asset Transfer Program that school enrolment rates have been increased among both groups over the year and the rates are a bit higher for the children of treatment households. Increasing trends observe in case of years of education for both groups but slightly higher for the children of control households over the years (Fig. 3b ). Statistics show that the percentage of treatment children who earned personally has been decreased sharply from 19 per cent in 2007 to 13 per cent in 2011 and then increased to 15 per cent in 2014 (Fig. 3c ). The same trend observes for the children of control households, but the rate is a bit higher than the children of treatment households in 2014. Average yearly income of the children who earned personally have increased sharply from baseline to end-line survey for the children of both groups and the amount is a little bit higher for the children of control households than treatment across all waves (Fig. 3d ). status. Fig. 2.4 presents the Kernel Density Estimations that estimate the probability density function of children's time allocation to study (Fig. 4a) and other occupations (Fig. 4b) for each of the survey year by treatment status using pooled panel. Both figures reveal almost similar level of time allocation to study and other occupations by the children of program participant and non-participant households in each year. Further, figure 2.5 illustrates the trends of time allocation to each employment activities. Children's involvement in household chores declines sharply from baseline (2007) to end-line survey (2014) for both groups (Fig. 5a). For the children of control households, data indicate a steady increase in study time from baseline to 2011 and then declines in 2014 (Fig. 5b). Treatment children's involvement to Agri self-employment have increased thrice from baseline to first follow up (2009) and then decline in 2011 and 2014 but the number of working days is still higher than the baseline (Fig 5c). It suggests that immediately after receiving the program's Figure 3c Children earned personally Figure 3d Personal income (yearly/BDT) Figure 2.3 Changes in key indicators on education and income of the children age 5 to 16 years across all waves 28.4 24.2 19.0 17.6 31.1 22.9 20.8 18.3 0.0 5.0 10.0 15.0 20.0 25.0 30.0 35.0 2007 2009 2011 2014 School dropout (%) Year
Treatment Control 1.90 2.00 2.25 2.89 1.98 2.09 2.28 2.95 0.00 0.50 1.00 1.50 2.00 2.50 3.00 3.50 2007 2009 2011 2014 Years of education Year Treatment Control 19.4 15.9 12.9 15.0 21.2 16.2 14.9 16.0 0.0 5.0 10.0 15.0 20.0 25.0 2007 2009 2011 2014 Earned personally (%) Year Treatment Control 1725 2238 2888 5170 1868 2265 2826 5217 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 4500 5000 5500 2007 2009 2011 2014 Personal income (BDT) Year Treatment Control 32Chapter 2: Like Mother Like Daughter? Occupational Mobility among Children under the Asset Transfer Program Figure 5a Household chores Figure 5b Study Figure 5c Agri self-employment Figure 5d Non-Agri self-employment Figure 5e Unskilled work (yearly) Figure 2.5 Changes in key outcome variables for the children age 5 to 16 years across all waves Descriptive statistics for the sub-group present in Fig. 2.6-2.8 showing almost the same trends for the children of treatment and control households as we find for the earlier group/full sample. However, we notice visible differences in the children's status across 28.4 26.8 18.9 13.7 28.9 25.3 20.3 13.1 0.0 5.0 10.0 15.0 20.0 25.0 30.0 35.0 2007 2009 2011 2014 Days on households chores Year Treatment Control 238.7 241.3 253.7 193.0 242.3 254.5 261.2 194.9 0.0 50.0 100.0 150.0 200.0 250.0 300.0 2007 2009 2011 2014 Days on study Year Treatment Control 29.0 105.1 80.1 56.1 30.5 38.8 37.0 37.8 0.0 20.0 40.0 60.0 80.0 100.0 120.0 2007 2009 2011 2014 Days on Agri self-work Year
Treatment Control 18.2 16.3 14.2 19.9 19.7 16.8 13.2 15.3 0.0 5.0 10.0 15.0 20.0 25.0 2007 2009 2011 2014 Days on skilled work Year Treatment Control 27.0 16.2 15.4 12.1 33.4 17.8 19.4 15.2 0.0 10.0 20.0 30.0 40.0 2007 2009 2011 2014 Days on Unskilled work Year Treatment Control the full sample and sub-group. Though observing downward trends on school dropout in case of the full sample, the scenario is a bit different for the subgroup. The dropout rate is a bit less for the children of treatment households across all waves. 27 Younger children's school dropout rate decreases slightly in the short run but increases sharply in the medium
and long run for both groups (Fig. 6a ). This may be due to the fact they are getting older and their age would be 12 to 16 in 2011 and 2014. While in case of the full sample as mentioned earlier, several young children who born after baseline or first follow up are there in the second (2011) and third follow-up (2014) survey. That might be the reason the school enrolment rate increases, and school dropout decreases in all the waves for the full sample.
Like the full sample, observing upward trends in case of years of education for both groups but slightly higher for the children of treatment households over the years (Fig. 6b ). Notably, although school enrolment decreases and school dropout increases in 2011 and 2014 due to the age of the children, years of education is upwards. As can be seen from Figure 6c Children earned personally (%) Figure 6d Personal income (yearly/BDT) Figure 2.6 Changes in key indicators on education and income of the children age 5 to 8 years at baseline across all waves Similar to the full sample, for the younger children, Fig. 2.7 demonstrates the Kernel Density Estimations that estimate the probability density function of their time allocation to study (Fig. 7a) and other occupations (Fig. 7b) for each of the survey years by treatment status. Here, we see almost similar level of time allocation to study by the children of program participant and non-participant households in each year. Different from the full sample, younger treatment children's involvement to other occupations are more skewed to the right in years 2009, 2011, and 2014 which indicates that they spend more days on other occupations after the intervention (Fig. 7b). Further, descriptive statistics on key outcomes indicators illustrate that unlike the full sample, children's involvement in household chores increased sharply from baseline to end-line survey for both groups (Fig. 8a). Like the full 3.1 2.8 6.3 22 3.7 3.1 6.7 22.5 0 5 10 15 20 25 2007 2009 2011 2014 School dropout (%) Year Treatment Control 0.49 1.31 2.64 4.75 0.51 1.41 2.55 4.70 0.00 1.00 2.00 3.00 4.00 5.00 2007 2009 2011 2014 Years of education Year Treatment Control 0.82 1.97 4.44 18.91 0.56 1.97 5.34 21.07 0 5 10 15 20 25 2007 2009 2011 2014 Earned personally (%) Year Treatment Control 57 185 660 5419 10 190 872 5417 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 4500 5000 5500 2007 2009 2011 2014 Personal income (BDT) year Treatment Control sample, for this sub-group, data show a steady increase of study time from baseline to 2011 and then declines in 2014 for the children of both (Fig. 8b). Treatment children's involvement in Agri and non-Agri self-employment increase sharply from baseline to endline survey (Fig. 8c and 8d). Increasing trends also observe for the children of control households for these but at a slower rate. Unlike the full sample, here increasing trends perceive on their involvement to unskilled work from baseline to end-line survey which pronounces more for the children of control (Fig. 8e). Figure 8a Days spent on household chores Figure 8b Days spent on study Figure 8c Days spent on Agri self-work Figure 8d Days Spent on skilled work Figure 8e Days spent on unskilled work Figure 2.8 Changes in key outcome variables for the children age 5 to 8 years at baseline across all waves
0.51 6.41 13.00 17.00 0.29 4.01 13.66 18.88 0.00 5.00 10.00 15.00 20.00 2007 2009 2011 2014 Days on household chores Year Treatment Control 230 241 260 202 237 256 272 207 100 150 200 250 300 2007 2009 2011 2014 Days on education Year Treatment Control 6.3 57.1 75.0 93.5 12.4 17.8 26.9 55.0 0.0 20.0 40.0 60.0 80.0 100.0 2007 2009 2011 2014 Days on agri self-work Year Treatment 0.28 1.01 3.18 6.22 0.00 0.00 0.30 2.03 0.00 1.00 2.00 3.00 4.00 5.00 6.00 7.00 2007 2009 2011 2014 Days on skilled work Year Treatment Control 0.00 0.01 0.05 1.29 0.65 0.79 1.08 2.45 0.00 0.50 1.00 1.50 2.00 2.50 3.00 2007 2009 2011 2014 Days on unskilled work Year Treatment Control
This section presents the findings of the different dimensions of the impacts as depicted in Section 4.
We start with exploring the impact of the asset transfer program using model 7 on time allocated towards study of the grant recipient's children whose age was 5 to 8 years at baseline i.e., in 2007 and currently enrolled in school from the pooled panel. As can be seen from Column 1 of
Table 2.1, study time of the children of program participant households is likely to reduce significantly by 8 days after two (2007-2009) years of intervention (p<0.05). While looking at the long-run effect (i.e. after 7 years), we find children of participant households are likely to spend more time on study, but the effect is not statistically significant. Gender disaggregated results show that girls of participants households are likely to spend less time on study in the medium run only (p<0.10) against the girls of control counterparts (Column 2). For working days of boys, we observe boys of participant households are likely to involve 10 more days on study in the longer run (p<0.05) than the boys of control households (Column 3). foot_3
Table 2.1 Impact on study of the children Both Girls Boys (1) (2) (3) 2 years post-intervention -8.687 ** -10.067 -7.551 (4.20) (6.52) (5.44) 4 years post-intervention -6.123 -112.0298 * -1.021 (4.64) (7.20) (5.96) 7 years post-intervention 2.864 -5.01 10.2417 ** (3.776) (5.72) (4.998) Observations 4273 2074 2199 R-squared 0.2365 0.2120 0.269 Note: Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All the regressions include a constant value and control for sub-districts fixed effects and a set of baseline demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. All outcomes are measured at the individual level.
In this section, we investigate the impact of the asset transfer program on the currently enrolled younger children's time allocation towards different employment categories.
Looking at the results from the pooled panel using model 7 for each of the survey year, we demonstrate that the likelihood of adopting entrepreneurship increases significantly for both boys and girls of participant households across all waves. 29 As shown in Panel A of Table 2 .2, the kids of this age group of participant households are likely to increase their time significantly on agricultural self-employment (p<0.01) by 43 days in the short run, 50 days in the medium run, and 38 days in the longer run (2007) (2008) (2009) (2010) (2011) (2012) (2013) (2014) . Children of participants households are significantly likely to work more days on non-Agri self-employment in the short-medium and longer run. However, no significant differences are reflected in their time devoted to household chores and unskilled work. Figure 2 .9 provides a graphical representation of the results for treatment against control after two, four, and seven years of intervention.
Gender disaggregated results indicate that female children of participant households are likely to spend significantly 40, 64, and 44 days more time to agricultural selfemployment in the short, medium, and long-run (p<0.01), respectively (Panel B of Table 2 .2). It is apparent that the magnitude of the effect is higher in the medium run. It might be the reason that girls of participant households reduce their time to study in the medium term.
Female children of the participant households are likely to devote significantly 8 days more time on non-agricultural skilled work in the longer run (p<0.05), and 3 days less time on unskilled work in the medium run (p<0.10). However, for household chores, no significant 29 Similar findings observe using the balanced panel (see Appendix
Table A.6) differences observed on time allocation among the girls of participant and non-participant households.
For working days of boys, we find almost the same trends on their time devoted to agricultural self-employment (Panel C of Table 2. 2). The numbers of working days of the boys of participant households in last one year are likely to increase significantly by 46, 38, and 35 days on agricultural self-employment in the short, medium, and longer run (p<0.01).
The working days of the boys of participant households are likely to increase significantly by two and four days in the short (p<0.10) and medium (p<0.05) run on non-Agri selfemployment. The long-run effect is positive but not statistically significant in this regard. No significant differences observed on time allocation among the boys of participant and non-participant households on household chores and unskilled work. Notes: This figure summarizes the results for the DiD estimates reported in Panel A of
Table 2.2. Each line represents the results against the corresponding control. About 95% confidence intervals provided.
Similar to the studies that claim that increasing household access to credit market leads to reduction or delayed school enrolment, and coincidental consequences of child labour (Wydick, 1999; Menon, 2004; Shimamura & Lastarria-Cornhiel, 2010; Augsburg et al., 2012; Lakdawala, 2018) , we find that grant recipient households are more likely to inject 2 .1), our descriptive statistics illustrate that school dropout is a bit lower for the children of treatment households during the period (Fig. 6a ). Like the children of control households, we observe an increasing trend in case of average years of education (Fig. 6b ) and study time (Fig. 8b ) for the children of treatment households during the same period (i.e. 2007-2009) . So, the long-term impact of attaining more years of schooling may offset the short-term reduction in schooling days.
Further, their involvement in Agri-and non-agricultural self-work may offer opportunities to stay away from distress occupation (that we see in
Table 2.2). Hence, a question may arise whether this kind of intervention/social protection program decreases school enrolment and increases involvement in paid work? To address this question and test our hypotheses (see section 2.2), we further explore the impact on other schooling outcomes -dropout and years of education (in columns 1 and 2 of Table 2.3) and personal earning status of the children using both balanced and pooled panel.
Using the balanced panel, first, we focus on schooling outcome and realize no significant effects on school dropout and years of education of the children of treated against control households across all waves (Panel A of Table 2 .3). In addition to the descriptive statistics mentioned above, we can say that the decline in study time in the short run (Column 1 of Table 2 .1) does not lead to higher dropouts or lower years of school attainment. Second, we focus on children's earning status -the economic value of their work to look at whether (1) they are getting involved in more income-generating activities, or (2) they are working as helping hand to their parents after receiving support. Result shows that total income of the children of treatment households increases in the short, medium (p<0.01) and long run.
Though the effect size is much higher in the long run, it is not statistically significant. The children's income was estimated based on the monetary value of the labour of children in each occupation they were involved in over the last year. Interestingly, on exploring whether the children earned personally (column 4 of Table 2 .3), and the amount if earned personally (column 5 of Table 2 .3), we do not find any significant difference among the children of treatment and control households. Moreover, we observe that the coefficients in column 5
of Table 2 .3, are negative across all waves which indicates that the children of treatment households who earned personally, their earnings are comparatively less than the children of control households. However, the effects are statistically insignificant. Based on the evidence in column 2 of Table 2 .3, we cannot deny the contribution of the children of treatment households as we notice their income is substantially higher than the children of control households across all waves. We can say that the children of treated households involve in earning activities to improve their family's economic condition as well. Though the children of treatment households are not earning personally, their contribution may be as helping hand for parents to enhance family income. However, it does not mean that it would affect their education. Otherwise, it would be too costly for the parents to hire labour from outside. Almost similar results have been observed for the pooled panel of this subsample (Panel B of Table 2 .3) except years of education decreases significantly in the short-run (p<0.10).
A substantial body of literature reveals a gender gap in child labour and exposes that girls are more likely to engage in unsafe and risky occupation and take substantially higher burden of work compared to boys (Blunch & Verner, 2001; Heady, 2003; Gautam & Sarangi, 2008) . Though Table 2 .2 presents a glimpse that female children of treatment households are less likely to be involved in unskilled work relative to the female children of control households, we further explore the heterogeneous impact of TUP and measure children's time allocation to employment activities by gender for the treatment and control households, separately using the pooled panel. Panel A of Table 2 .4 shows no significant differences on study time among the girls relative to boys of treatment households, but in case of control households (Panel B of Table 2 .4), we find girls are likely to spend more time on study relative to boys in the longer run (p<0.10). Among both treated and control households, girls relative to boys are likely to devote more time in household chores across all waves (p<0.01) which is common and expected in the context of Bangladesh. Girls among the treated group are likely to spend 11, 28, and 18 more days on agricultural selfwork in the short, medium and long-run relative to boys while among the control households, girls spend 15 and 9 more days in the short and long run but fewer days in the medium term. In case of non-agricultural skilled work, we observe that girls among the treated group are likely to spend 8 more days in the longer run relative to boys. Among the treated group, girls spend 3 days less time on unskilled work relative to boys in the longer run (Panel A of Table 2 .4) while among the control households, girls spend 3 days more time on unskilled work in the medium run (Panel B of Table 2 .4).
Moreover, our triple interaction results reported in panel C of
Table 2.4 indicates that girls of treatment households are likely to spend 15 days less time on study in the long run compared to the boys of control households (p<0.05). In case of household chores, we do not perceive any significant difference among them. Girls of treatment households are likely to spend 26 days more time on Agri self-employment in the medium term (p<0.10) and 7 more days on non-Agri skilled work in the long run relative to boys of control households (p<0.10). Girls of treatment households are likely to spend 4 days less time on unskilled work in the medium term (p<0.05) relative to boys of control households. After having a look at these results and the results that are mentioned earlier in Table 2.2 that girls of the treated households are more likely to be involved in skilled work compared to the girls of the control counterparts, suggest that the asset transfer program seems to play a role in reducing the gender gap as girls are less likely to involve in unskilled work than not only 48Chapter 2: Like Mother Like Daughter? Occupational Mobility among Children under the Asset Transfer Program boys of the treatment households (Panel A of Table 2.4) but also both boys and girls of the control households (Panel A of Table 2.2).
After looking at the intent-to-treat effect on the employment trajectories of the ultra poor children, we next explore the heterogenous effects of the TUP by baseline employment (i.e., in 2007, before program intervention). Tables 2.5 were a student at baseline are 57 pp less likely to be involved in study in the short run while they are 34 pp more likely to be engaged in the same in the medium term (p<0.01). The children of participant households are 24 pp more likely switch to agricultural selfemployment in the short-run (p<0.01). The treatment students shifting from study to agricultural self-employment have found to continue in the medium (i.e. during [2009] [2010] [2011] and long-run (i.e. during 2011-2014) by 5 (p<0.05) and 4 pp (NS), respectively. In the longer run, they are, however, 8 pp more likely to be involved in non-agricultural self-employment and 7 pp less likely to be involved in unskilled work (p<0.10). Findings show no significant effect on the children of participant households who were involved in agricultural selfemployment at baseline to switch in other occupations over the year except they are 24 pp 50Chapter 2: Like Mother Like Daughter? Occupational Mobility among Children under the Asset Transfer Program more likely to switch to household chores in the longer run (p<0.10). They are 90 pp more likely to be involved in the same occupation i.e. agricultural self-employment in the short run (p<0.01).
It is also apparent from
Table 2.5 that children of participant households who were involved in non-agricultural skilled work at baseline are 37 pp more likely to be involved in agricultural self-employment during 2007-2009 (p<0.05). No significant transition reflects among them in the medium and longer-term to other occupations. What is striking about the figures in this table is that children of program participant households who worked unskilled works at baseline are 37 and 47 pp more likely to switch to household chores (p<0.05) and agricultural self-employment (p<0.01) during 2007-2009, respectively. They are 76 pp, and 12 pp less likely to shift on non-agricultural skilled employment (p<0.10) and unskilled work (NS) during the period, respectively. However, no incremental effects observe during 2009-2011 and 2011-2014. 2007-2009 2009-2011 2011-2014 2007-2009 2009-2011 2011-2014 2007-2009 2009-2011 2011-2014 2007-2009 2009-2011 2011-2014 2007-2009 2009-2011 2011 -2014 HH chores -0.16 -0.63 0.05 -0.03 0.02 0.01 -0.07 -0.03 0.24* -0.08 -0.03 0.06 0.37** 0.08 0.05 (0.31) (0.41) (0.56) (0.03) (0.02) (0.02) (0.20) (0.14) (0.12) (0.19) (0.06) (0.08) (0.16) (0.14) (0.14) Study -0.53 0.32 -0.23 -0.57*** 0.34*** -0.08 -0.04 0.31 -0.38 0.07 0.05 -0.14 0.03 -0.07 -0.07 (0.39) (0.50) (0.52) (0.09) (0.10) (0.09) (0.34) (0.28) (0.29) (0.15) (0.24) (0.19) (0.15) (0.30) (0.21) Agricultural 0.73*** -0.57*** -0.18 0.24*** 0.05** 0.04 0.90*** -0.22 0.06 0.37** -0.08 -0.02 0.47*** 0.15 0.07 self-work (0.16) (0.20) (0.19) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.27) (0.14) (0.12) (0.14) (0.09) (0.11) (0.08) (0.20) (0.13) Non-Agri 0.54 0.20 0.46* -0.01 0.04 0.08* -0.10 0.25 -0.08 0.27 0.15 0.29 -0.76* -0.38 0.38 skilled work (0.34) (0.26) (0.28) (0.04) (0.03) (0.05) (0.28) (0.15) (0.28) (0.64) (0.69) (0.71) (0.39) (0.38) (0.45) Unskilled -0.50* -0.69 0.37 -0.02 -0.04 -0.07* 0.03 0.30 -0.14 0.04 -0.03 -0.20 -0.12 -0.22 0.44 works (0.27) (0.49) (0.47) (0.04) (0.03) (0.04) (0.32) (0.20) (0.24) (0.31) (0.38) (0.36) (0.53) (0.60) (0.60) Observations 383 299 227 5082 5505 5949 390 1073 858 450 417 322 691 443 406 Note: Standard errors in parentheses. These results postulate that after receiving program support, the children of the program participant households are likely to spend more time on agricultural self-employment to supplement the work of their mothers. Notably, findings demonstrate a consistent trend of treatment children's involvement in agricultural self-employment from study and unskilled work in the short, medium, and long-run against the children of non-participant households.
Households with child labours that receive productive asset as grant are likely to depend mostly on the younger family members for the labour to work and evidence shows an increase in work amongst young people who were not involved in child labour before intervention (Edmonds & Theoharides, 2020) . Moreover, Evidence reveals that women in grant recipient households are likely to devote themselves more towards income-generating activities (Del Carpio et al., 2016) , this might increase the return of child's labour in these activities to substitute for mother's work. In this study, we observe the same trend. As reported in column 2 of Appendix Table A.7, the grant recipients (mother of the sampled children) are likely to involve 274, 228, and 165 days more on agricultural self-employment in the short, medium and long run against the non-recipient (p<0.01). Results also show that grant recipient women are likely to spend 10 and 24 days less time on unskilled work in the short (p<0.05) and medium (p<0.01) run.
Further, we produce a correlation matrix between mothers' activities and children's employment activities separately for program participant and non-participant households (Table 2.6
The literature on the impact of the cash transfer program that directly targets the children, on time allocation of child labour is available while the impact of asset transfer program that targets the main female of the households, on time allocation of child labour, in the long run, is largely lacking. Using longitudinal data from a Randomized Controlled Trial of the TUP program, this study provides empirical evidence of how the grant-based asset transfer program impacts on time allocation of child labour of the ultra poor children in the long run. Firstly, following Becker's seminal work on the allocation of time (Becker, 1965) , we show how an exogenous uncompensated increase in income, due to asset transfer, affects the intrahousehold time allocation decisions. This theoretical model, on one hand, demonstrates how an increase in asset and skill training expands income-generating activities, which increases the opportunity cost of schooling and leisure for the potential working members of the households. On the other hand, this model also illustrates, how the associated increase in income would expand the new opportunity curve upward and increase the demand for educational opportunities that were reduced earlier. Secondly, we assess the impact of the intervention on children's time allocation to study and work. Thirdly, we explore the heterogeneous impact of the TUP by the children's gender and baseline employment. We estimate the impact of the program on time allocation of child labour using a difference-indifference model.
Findings show that study time of the children of program participant households is likely to reduce in the short run i.e. after two years of intervention while they are likely to spend more time on study in the long run, but the effect is statistically significant for boys only. We do not observe any significant difference in years of education and school drop out of the children of participant and non-participant households across all waves. So, the long-term impact of attaining more days in study may offset the short-term reduction in study time.
The likelihoods of adopting Agri-and non-agricultural self-employment increase significantly both for boys and girls across all waves among the children of program participant households. Evidence implies that the children in the treated households are likely to engage 56Chapter 2: Like Mother Like Daughter? Occupational Mobility among Children under the Asset Transfer Program in economic activities to supplement the family income while simultaneously attending school. Further, their involvement in Agri-and non-agricultural self-work may offer opportunities to stay away from distress occupation. It seems that treated family's economic condition partly improves due to their children's involvement to earnings as well, otherwise, it would be too costly for the parents to hire labour from outside. Our findings correspond to Del Carpio et al.
(2016) which show that children of business grant recipient households are more likely to engage in skilled work to help their families diversifying their financial activities. This might be the reason, we find that the children of program participant households are more likely to engage in Agri and non-Agri self-work as their mothers i.e. grant recipient women are more likely to involve in these activities.
Female children of the participant households are likely to devote significantly less time on unskilled work in the medium run relative to the girls of non-participant households. Our results also show that the asset transfer program is likely to reduce the gender gap in unskilled employment as girls become less likely to undertake unskilled work both relative to the boys in her household and all children in the non-participating households.
Results on heterogeneous effects of TUP by baseline employment illustrate that the children who were a student at baseline are less likely to be involved in study, but more likely switch to agricultural self-employment in the short (2007) (2008) (2009) and medium terms (2009) (2010) (2011) . However, children of participant households who were in household chores or a student at baseline are less likely to be involved in unskilled work during 2007-2009 and 2011-2014, respectively. Children of participant households who were involved in non-agricultural skilled work or unskilled work at baseline are more likely to be involved in agricultural selfemployment in the short run. Results indicate a consistent trend of treatment children's involvement in agricultural self-employment from all baseline employment activities in the short run. These imply the fact that they are likely to supplement the work of their mothers immediately after receiving the program support.
Randomized Controlled Trial in Bangladesh
Time preference and risk attitude play significant roles in the economic decision-making process of nearly all individuals. A great deal of attention has been devoted to studying the effects of these preference attributes on economic outcomes (such as income, labour supply, savings, investments, borrowing, bargaining), demographic and social identity outcomes (such as age, gender, race, education, cognition), major life events (such as the experience of war, job displacement, serious health condition, inflation), length of life, and planning for the end of life care (Donkers et al., 2001; Bommier, 2006; Benjamin et al., 2010; Meier & Sprenger, 2010; Shapiro, 2010; Tanaka et al., 2010; Dohmen & Falk, 2011; Malmendier & Nagel, 2011; Loewenstein et al., 2012; Sahm, 2012; Tymula et al., 2012; Benjamin et al., 2013; Sutter et al., 2013; Golsteyn, 2014; Schweighofer-Kodritsch, 2018; Huffman et al., 2019; Czajkowski et al., 2020) . However, most of these studies assume these preference parameters are exogenous to the outcome of interest, for example, saving or borrowing decisions. In practice, income or wealth may alter time and risk preferences. Available evidence shows that endowment has a positive effect on the level of patience and risk aversion and creditconstrained households are more likely to be risk averse (Halvey, 2008; Guiso & Paiella, 2008) .
That is, these preference parameters are subject to income effects, and therefore endogenous to saving or borrowing decisions. Existing evidence hardly provides convincing evidence on the causality between income on the one hand, and time and risk preferences on the other. This study bridges this gap by providing causal evidence of how an increase in wealth affects time and risk preferences using a Randomized Controlled Trial. We hypothesize whether higher levels of (i) income and (ii) asset ownership are correlated with time preference and risk attitude. Guiso and Paiella (2008) demonstrate that absolute risk aversion declines with wealth while risk tolerance increases. Individuals residing in wealthy villages are less likely to be impatient and risk averse; a positive association between the household income and level of patience is observed (lower temporal discount rate) while in case of risk preference the correlation is different (Tanaka, 2010) . However, ample studies show that wealthier households are more likely to invest in productive activities that are risky and earn higher profits (Rosenzweig & Binswanger, 1992; Nielsen, 2001) .
Using two rounds of panel data from a randomized experiment conducted by BRAC's
Targeting the Ultra Poor (TUP) program in Bangladesh, we explore whether the shape of the preferences of TUP beneficiaries changed as a result of the customized credit injection. As mentioned earlier, the program provides a soft loan along with additional monetary transfers to the main female of the selected poorer households to help them move out of poverty through the initiation or expansion of income-generating activities. However, no evidence exists on the effectiveness of such interventions towards economically relevant preferential or behavioural attributes such as patience and risk-taking ability of the women. A well-planned approach and scheme that provide aid, asset, and credit may influence highly on women's living (Kabeer, 2018 ) that can affect their preferences. Therefore, we assume the intervention to have a heterogeneous impact on human preferences across two dimensions: (i) income, and (ii) asset ownership. The behavioural factors are especially critical for economic decision-making required for utilizing the transferred assets/loan effectively. Evidence shows poor people are risk averse and less likely to start up a new business, and similarly, impatient people are not willing for financial investment and children education (Tanaka et al., 2010) . Credit programs may promote patience and risk-taking abilities that are critical for successful entrepreneurship.
In the context of rural Mexico, Bianchi and Bobba (2013) demonstrate that the cash transfer increases the eagerness to take a risk which eventually fostered entrepreneurial activities. In 60Chapter 3: Behavioural Benefits of Credit Transfer: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Bangladesh line with the theoretical literature, we expect an increase in income due to credit injection would help the 'treated' women to become more patient and exhibit less present bias. They are also expected to be more willing to take risks (reduction of risk-aversion). In the context of developing countries, Nielsen (2001) observes positive associations among wealth and risk aversion in Madagascar, while Yesuf (2004) and Wik et. al. (2004) find the opposite relationships in India. The randomized credit shock, by design, provides an ideal opportunity to explore and quantify the causal effects of the accrual of income and wealth on time preference and risk attitudes in the monetary domain. Though it is not a direct component of the program, we investigate whether the program has improved economic decision-making through behaviour change, beyond the direct impact on income. We achieve this by embedding some widely used experimental tools to elicit measures of impatience, present-bias, and risk attitude in the program surveys.
The paper makes two significant contributions to the literature. First, we provide the first large-scale RCT-based causal evidence that income and wealth alter both intertemporal substitution and curvature of individual preferences -commonly known as the 'primitives'. In particular, we reveal that rates of time preference as well as risk aversion are diminishing in income and wealth regardless of how these primitives and wealth are measured. The evidence of diminishing time preference (increasing patience) in wealth provides support to the theory on diminishing impatience (Sarkar, 2007; Tanaka et al., 2010) . The results on risk aversion lend strong support to that preferences exhibit diminishing absolute risk aversion (DARA), thereby rejecting the commonly assumed constant absolute risk aversion (CARA) preference.
This result aligns well with that found in Guiso and Paiella (2008) . Second, the paper contributes to the literature on the effects of microfinance. A substantial body of literature documents the positive effect of similar cash or credit transfer programs on income, employment, food security, asset accumulation, and accessing and using of health services (Pitt & Khandker, 1998; Morduch & Haley, 2002; Mosley & Rock, 2004; Krishna et al., 2012; Banerjee et al., 2015a; Bandiera et al., 2016; Blattman et al., 2016; Hossain & Wadood, 2020; ) .
Although recent research has recognized that programs that offer an allowance, cash, and loan, can affect preferences of the beneficiaries through changing 'livelihood capabilities' (Kabeer, 2018) , no evidence exists to support this claim. This paper provides the first causal evidence on the effectiveness of credit transfer in building economically relevant and entrepreneurially useful behavioural attributes such as patience and risk-taking ability among women.
The outcomes have important policy implications. Our results suggest that the increase in income due to the credit transfer not only enables the participants to engage in incomegenerating activities but it also enables them to attain a time-consistent longer planning horizon critical for investment in assets (e.g., education, health, technology) that yield higher benefits in the future. Likewise, higher-income allows a woman to be more willing to undertake entrepreneurial risks and initiate new ventures. Therefore, the results shed light on the benefits that may accrue over and above the more commonly observed benefits of a credit transfer program.
The rest of the chapter is organized as: section two describes the data and measure for eliciting discount rates and risk aversion. Section three provides the estimation model, and section four presents results and describes how the intervention and monetary success hit human preferences. Section five concludes.
62Chapter 3: Behavioural Benefits of Credit Transfer: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Bangladesh Although the targeted sample for the baseline survey was 8800 (88x100) households, a total of 8,961 eligible households were successfully surveyed. This is due to 'overcorrecting' for some branches that had fewer than 100 eligible households, by surveying more than 100 eligible households wherever available. Of the 8,961 eligible households, 1,919 households were from the control branch offices and the remaining 7,042 households were from the treatment branch offices. In the 2018 follow-up survey, it was possible to successfully survey a total of 5,939 30 Program collects information about the intensity of coverage of other programs in each sub-districts of these districts before intervention/final selection of the site. 31 In the baseline, program intended to assess the relative effects of three different types of coaching for the ultrapoor eligible for the STUP support package. For that 66 treatment branches were recruited, i.e. 22 treatment branches for each type of coaching. Training component of the program varies across the three treatment arms of STUP. While for those that are eligible for the OTUP or customized credit transfer, intervention remained the same across the three arms.
households of which 1,727 of 1,919 were from control branch offices and the remaining 3,255 households of 7,042 are from treatment branch offices. 32 As we intend to estimate the average treatment effect on the treated (ATT), our dataset excluded 957 households who did not receive any program support in the treatment branches. 33
This study uses several methods to elicit time preferences or attitudes towards risk. In this section, we describe each of them in brief and present each of the elicitation methods along with choice task in Appendix B. All the tasks are hypothetical. While comparing hypothetical versus real stakes elicitation methods, Johnson and Bickel (2002) find no systematic variations concerning the outcomes of the real and hypothetical elicitation methods but Kirby and Marakovíc (1995) , and Coller and Williams (1999) observe significantly different result in case of hypothetical elicitation.
The baseline and the follow-up surveys elicited measures of attitude toward delay, or impatience using a variety of tools. One approach is to have the respondents report their preferred length of waiting time before receiving a certain amount of money instead of receiving a lower amount today. This approach provides a discount-rate measure that relies on the temporal variation to receive a given monetary increment. The more widely used approach is to elicit time-preference using a choice-list task (Harrison et al., 2002) . We use both elicitation tools. 32 In 2017, the TUP has made huge changes in their STUP support package. They are no longer provides asset as grant to eligible STUP households, as they have been shifted to cost recovery model since 2017. That is why, the program no longer interested to look at the relative effects of three different types of coaching designed for the eligible STUP households. So, in follow up survey the STUP households are excluded from the survey. Therefore, as the OTUP support package was same across all the 66 treatment branches, program decides to survey randomly half of them for reducing survey cost. 33 They refuse to receive loan from the TUP program.
64Chapter 3: Behavioural Benefits of Credit Transfer: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Bangladesh
Our survey (at baseline and follow up) asked the respondent to report whether they would like to receive Tk. 200 today or Tk. 250 after one month if they win a prize (Task 1 of Appendix
Table B.1). Similarly, another question was asked where they would like to receive Tk. 200 today or Tk. 250 after two months if they win a prize (as in Ashraf et al., 2006). A question may arise, what this Tk. 200 means to our sampled households? According to the definition of the World Bank, extreme poor are those who have income less than USD 1.90 per person per day at PPP exchange rate. 34 The PPP exchange rate was Tk. 28.25 per USD in 2016. Around 56 per cent of our sampled households' per capita daily income is below USD 1.90, and their per capita food expenditure is Tk. 42 in 2016 (Appendix Table B.2). Therefore, Tk. 200 is
around four and five times higher than their per capita daily income and food expenditure, respectively.
In addition to these two questions, we embedded two additional choice-list tasks in the follow-up survey (Task 2 of Appendix Table B .1). In both of these choice-list tasks, the respondents were asked to choose between an early payoff that remained fixed (Tk. 200) and a later payoff (in three months) that increased monotonically along with the list, commencing with the payoff at the previous time point. In the first question/task, the respondents were provided with five alternative saving schemes in their familiar bank to keep a hypothetical (windfall) gain, as in Sutter et al. (2013) and Bauer et al. (2012) . We ask "Do you like to take (1) Tk. 200 today or (2) Tk. 265 after three months. Keeping the earlier amount fixed, the respondents were asked to answer five such questions where each question rises the future payoff. Same as Bauer et al. (2012) the delayed payments were made gradually more rewarding in each subsequent option (Tk. 265, 280, 300, 330, and 375) . Like this, we add another question to explore whether the preference changes in case of long duration. Here we ask "Do you like to take (1) Tk. 200 after three months or (2) Tk. 265 after one year and three months. Like the previous question, we offer the second option of each question more rewarding (Tk. 265, 280, 300, 330, and 375) keeping the first option constant. We call this first task as 'short-horizon' time preference task. The second task aims to test the time-consistency of time-preference. This task involves the same choice-list, but all payables are presented with an upfront delay of one year. This is referred to as the 'long-horizon' time preference task.
In both questions, the respondents made one choice for each alternative scheme. As apparent from Task 2 of Appendix
Table B.1, the later a person switches from the more immediate payoff to a future payoff, the more impatient she is. The intuition is that those who switch later, require a larger amount to be indifferent to the earlier payoff. The respondent's subjective discount rate is calculated based on the future equivalent of the earlier payoff (Tk. 200), given by the average among the two subsequent payoffs where respondent shifts from the previous to the later payment. If the future equivalent of Tk. 200 is Tk. X in three months, the annual discount rate is computed as log (Tk. X/Tk. 200)*(12/3) (Sutter et al., 2013) .
Risk-attitudes are measured in multiple domains in the follow-up survey. The respondents were asked to express their willingness to take risks in (1) financial matters and ( 2 ) general. The risk attitudes in the financial/monetary domain were measured in two ways. First, we utilized a close replication of the protocol constructed and used for a comparable population in India by Binswanger (1980) and Bauer et al. (2012) . In both baseline and follow up survey, each of the participants was asked to choose one of four different hypothetical lotteries (Task 1 of Appendix Table B .3). Respondents were told that they have an equal chance to win i.e. every option generated either a high or a low payment with a probability of 0.5. The respondents have the chance to ( 1 ) get the sure amount of money of Tk. 100 if win or even fail to win, ( 2 ) get Tk. 200 if win and get Tk. 60 if fail to win, (3) get Tk. 300 if win and get Tk. 20 if fail to win, 66Chapter 3: Behavioural Benefits of Credit Transfer: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Bangladesh
and (4) get Tk. 400 if win and get nothing if fail to win. These indicate that the lottery gets increasingly risky as we move across the options from one to four. Second, a hypothetical question was asked to the respondents in the follow-up survey to report what is the maximum amount they would like to invest to gain Tk. 10,000 where they have an equal chance of win or loss (Task 2 of Appendix Table B .3). It is to be noted here that Tk. 10,000 is about 8 times of the monthly per capita food expenditure of the sampled households; thus, the investment exemplifies a comparatively high risk. 35 To answer this question, respondents were given ten options where 'A' equals to zero (means the respondent is not willing to invest at all), 'B' equals to Tk 1000 (i.e. she is willing to invest maximum 1000), and so on. An answer to this question provides an opportunity to measure the degree of absolute risk aversion for the respondent in the sample. We assume that after intervention, the program participants would be more confident and would like to take more risk or to invest more to win. Therefore, following Dohmen & Falk (2011) in the follow-up survey, the risk attitude in 'general' was measured using an eleven-point Likert scale where zero denotes complete unwillingness to take risks and ten denotes complete willingness to take risks (Task 3 of Appendix Table B .3).
As discussed, this study uses two years of experimental panel data, and cross-sectional field experiment data to estimate the effects of the intervention on human preferences.
To evaluate the effect, we compare the change in outcome variable of the program beneficiaries with the change in outcome variable of the control group. Despite randomization, our models control for demographic and socioeconomic characteristics such as respondents age, education, marital status, number of children, household head's sex, land ownership (household owns less than 30 decimals of land), per capita income (below $1.9 at PPP exchange rate), for any compositional differences in the sampled households. Therefore, any differences between the treatment and control households at follow-up that is after two years of intervention could then be inferred as causal impacts of the intervention. Thus, to measure the effect of intervention using two years of panel data, we use the difference-in-difference (DiD) technique and follow the models given below for binary and count variables.
To explore the impact of intervention on respondents willingness to accept Tk. 200 today instead of Tk. 250 later, we use a binary logistic regression model. The coefficient of the interaction term / is the causal impacts of the program i.e. the effect of treatment on time preference relative to the control after two years of intervention.
Therefore, to measure the heterogeneous impacts of the higher levels of income and asset ownership due to credit injection on human preferences, we use the following triple differenced model 10 and 11, respectively. If we would estimate difference-indifference to explore whether higher income or wealth (in this paper we use wealth as substitutes of the asset) is correlated with time and risk preference, we would miss out the impact of the program. We assume that as the credit injection improves the financial wellbeing of the targeted households, it might affect their behavioural attributes such as patience. Thus, Model 10 and 11 allow us to identify the causal impact of TUP on the outcomes of interest. We estimate the following triple
Here, ; denotes household's per capita annual income. 36 The parameter > is the triple-differenced estimator with triple interaction that estimates the behaviours of the higher income program participants in terms of time preference and risk attitudes.
! "#$ = ( + * + , "# + * -. $ + * : ? $ + * < (. $ * , "# ) + * = (, "# * @ $ ) + A(. $ * , "# * ? $ ) + 34 "5 + 6 # + 7 "#$ (11)
Here, @ denotes wealth (constructed an index based on the respondent's assets) and the parameter A is the triple-differenced estimator with triple interaction that estimates the behaviours of the wealthier program participants in terms of time preference and risk attitudes. 37 Thus, we rewrite the above models into the following empirical models while we use cross-sectional data to analyse the effect of intervention, income, and wealth on the rural women's present and future biased time preferences, respectively. We use the binary logistic regression model for dichotomous dependent variables.
! "# = ( + /, "# + 34 "5 + 6 # + 7 "# (12)
! "# = ( + * + , "# + * -; + >(, "# * ;) + 34 "5 + 6 # + 7 "# (13) ! "# = ( + * + , "# + * -? + A(, "# * ?) + 34 "5 + 6 # + 7 "# ( 14 ) 36 To check the robustness, we carried out the same analysis using only respondent's annual income and observed similar results. To explore the income effect, we use household's per capita annual income instead of respondents annual income as we use household's asset ownership while explore wealth effect. 37 We construct an asset index using principal components analysis based on the households productive and non-productive asset ownership.
To explore the impact of intervention, income, and wealth on risk aversion through a hypothetical lottery, which is ordinal in nature, we use generalized ordered logit model to compare each of the alternatives with others. The Generalized Ordered Logit model (Williams, 2016) for an ordinal outcome variable, can be written as
where N is the number of types of the ordinal dependent variable. For instance, if the outcome variable has three probable values, the gologit model will have two sets of coefficients; in consequence, concurrently two models are estimated. When N = 2, the gologit model is similar to the logistic regression model. When N > 2, the gologit model turn out to be equal to a series of binary logistic regressions or cumulative logit model where types of the dependent variable are merged. If N = 4 that we have seen
3,401 1,581 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 Yes No Frequency 610 971 0 500 1,000 1,500
Yes No Frequency for our hypothetical lottery (Fig. 3 .2), then for T = 1, type 1 (no risk i.e. get Tk. 100 if win or fail to win) is contrasted with types 2, 3 and 4 (higher risk); for T = 2, the contrast is between types 1 and 2 (lower risk) versus 3 and 4 (higher risk); and for T = 3, types 1, 2 and 3 (lower risk) is contrasted with type 4 (highest risk). In each dummy variable, in effect, zero denotes to the lower values, while one denotes to the higher values. If the coefficients are positive, it indicates that an increase in the explanatory variable increases the likelihood of choosing riskier options, while negative coefficients indicate that an increase in the explanatory variable decreases the likelihood of choosing risky options i.e. they are more likely to choose the no risk or less risky options.
Thus, to explore the rural women's attitude towards risk in financial matters, we estimate the mentioned linear difference-in-differences models for cumulative binary outcomes using HXYXH%92 and explore risk attitude. We use the empirical models 9, 10, and 11, and capture the effect of intervention, income, and wealth, respectively using two years of panel data. 3,423 283 154 1122 0 1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000
Get Tk.100 if win or fail to win Get TK. 200 if win and get TK.60 if fail to win Get TK. 300 if win and get TK.20 if fail to win Get TK. 400 if win and get nothing if fail to win Frequency
Cameron and Trivedi (1998) pointed out the necessities to model count variables in a different way than other types of variables. Though there are multiple ways to estimate a count data model, the two most commonly used distributional assumptions are poisson and negative binomial (Cameron & Trivedi, 1998; Mullahy, 1986; Ver Hoef & Boveng, 2007; Zeileis et al., 2008; Shonkwiler, 2016; ) . However, poisson model is a good fit when variance (Z) of the outcome variable is equal to mean ([), and negative binomial model is appropriate when there is over-dispersion that is variance is higher than the mean (i.e. Z = [ \ ]
^); where > is an overdispersion parameter.
Where [ " = 9 " [ and ( = + i 38 We conduct Shapiro Wilk test for normality and find the p value is less than .000, thus the null hypothesis which indicates data are normally distributed are rejected. It is expected because the distribution of count data with a low mean practically fail to approach a normal distribution. Moreover, Cameron and Trivedi (1998) pointed out that the values of count variables are not negative integer; the lowest possible value is zero and seem to be right skewed, with most values relatively low. They also assume excessive unobserved heterogeneity in the event that leads to over-dispersion that is, the actual variance is higher than the mean. 39 In case of a count data regression mode, one of the common ways to accommodate over-dispersion is to apply a negative binomial model.
The parameter [ is the mean incidence rate of ! per unit of exposure and Thus, using cross-sectional data, we use the negative binomial models in the empirical regression models 12, 13, and 14 to analyse the effects of intervention, income, and wealth on the rural women's discount rates and willingness to take a risk in general. Mean: 336.66, Variance: 2601.65 Mean: 343.94, Variance: 2337.22 Fig. 3c Willingness to take a risk in general Mean: 3.199, Variance: 7.583 Figure 3.3 Histogram of discount rates and willingness to take a risk in general To explore the impact of the intervention on respondents' willingness for financial investment (Fig. 4.4), we use the hurdle model with negative binomial.
Because, in addition to over-dispersion (mean: 1.328, and variance 3.717), this count data exhibits more zero observations (Fig. 4 .4) than described by the simple count data distributions. Statistics show about 41 per cent of the respondents are unwilling to respond that is they are not willing to pay a positive price. Several authors suggest using hurdle model (first developed by Cragg (1971) ) as it is a two-part model that includes zero counts and positive counts (Mullahy, 1986; Cameron & Trivedi, 2005; 1998; Balderama et al., 2016; Hofstetter et al., 2016) . The underlying idea is that when a 'threshold' or 'hurdle' is crossed, positive counts occur. That is, in our case if the respondents are willing for financial investment, the 'hurdle/threshold' is crossed;
otherwise, we have a count of 0. Therefore, the zero counts part of the model is typically a binary logit model (i.e. whether the respondents are willing to invest or not). And the positive counts part of the model is usually a truncated Poisson or Negative Binomial model (in our case, we use negative binomial as overdispersion observed) that directs how much they are likely to invest.
Following Zeileis et al. (2008) , the Hurdle model can be expressed as -
In this model, ! " is the value of the dependent variable for individual i, u and t are the vectors of predictor variables in the zero and hurdle part, respectively.
γ and β denote the vectors of coefficients belonging to z and x, respectively (Zeileis et al., 2008; Hofstetter et al., 2016) . w xjyz denotes the pdf for the binary zero vs. non-zero counts and w |z}r$ denotes the pdf for the positive counts.
To estimate the effects of intervention, income, and wealth on willingness to financial investment using cross-sectional data, we use hurdle model with negative binomial in the empirical regression models 12, 13, and 14, respectively. 3.4 Results and Discussion
Here, we capture the impact of the program on rural poor women's time preference using logistic regression and report the odds ratio that indicates the ratio of two incidences. 40 As mentioned earlier, our survey asks the respondent to report whether they would like to accept Tk. 200 today or Tk. 250 after one month if they win a prize.
The result using model 9 shows that non-participants are significantly impatient, and they are not willing to accept a smaller amount of money today instead of a higher amount after one or two month/s. As can be seen from column 1 of Table 3 .1, the row 'Treat' indicates that the women of treated households are 5 per cent more impatient than the women of control at baseline. While the row 'Year18' shows that impatience increased by 36 per cent among the women of control households in 2018 (p<0.01) compared to baseline (i.e. 2016). The interaction term 'Treat#Year18' reveals the 'program effect' after two years of intervention' which shows that program participants are 22 per cent less likely to accept Tk.200 today instead of Tk.250 after one month (p<0.01). Similarly, column 4 of the same table shows that they are 41 per cent less likely to accept today's smaller amount instead of the higher amount after two months against the control counterparts (p<0.01). Consistent results observe in both measures.
Abundant studies show the association of patience with creditworthiness (Meier & Sprenger, 2012) , community violence (Voors et al., 2012) , across countries and wealth (Becker & Mulligan, 1997) , smoking, drug users (Bickel et al., 1999; Kirby et al., 40 If p1 is the probability of a positive count for the group that received program support and p2 is the probability of a positive count for the group that did not receive the support, the two groups are then compared using the odds ratio (OR = [p1/(1-p1)]/[p2/(1-p2)]). 1999; Kirby & Petry, 2004) , characteristics such as behaviour, age, test score, gender (Fuchs, 1982; Mischel et al., 1989; Warner & Pleeter, 2001; Kirby et al., 2002; Bettinger & Slonim, 2007; Jamison et al., 2012) , here we explore the association with income and wealth. Using models 10 and 11, we measure the effects of income and wealth on impatience. The row 'Income' indicates that higher income women of control households are 4 per cent more impatient than the lower-income women of control households (p<0.01) at baseline (column 2 of Table 3 .1). The row 'Wealth'
indicates that the wealthier women of control households are 5 per cent more impatient than the less wealthy women of control households (p<0.05) at baseline (column 3 of Table 3 .1). Income and wealth effects among the treated after two years of intervention are given by the coefficients of the triple interaction terms 'Treat#Year18# Income' and 'Treat#Year18# Wealth', respectively. Results in columns 2 and 5 of Table 3 .1
show that the program participants with a higher level of income are less impatience i.e. they are 0.6 and 4 per cent less likely to accept a smaller amount of money today instead of a higher amount after one (NS) and two month/s (p<0.01), respectively.
Wealth effect shows a bit different but insignificant results for the first indicator.
Findings in columns 3 and 6 of Table 3 .1 demonstrate that the wealthier program participants are 4 per cent more impatience i.e. they are willing to accept Tk.200 today instead of Tk.250 after one month (NS), but 19 per cent less likely to accept a smaller amount of money today instead of a higher amount after two months (p<0.01). Our findings correspond to several studies where authors find that higher levels of income and wealth are positively correlated with patience (e.g. Tanaka et al., 2010; Huffman et al., 2019) . Patience is one of the attractive personal characteristics that foster an individual's well-being and several studies show that patience is positively corelated with subjective well-being, whereas impatience is positively associated with depression and more physical complaints (Spence et al., 1987; Schnitker & Emmons, 2007; Schnitker, 2012; Schnitker et al., 2020) .
Table 3.1 Impact on time preferences Willing to accept Tk.200 today instead of TK.250 after one month Willing to accept Tk.200 today instead of TK.250 after two months (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Treat 1.051 1.387*** 0.944 1.145 1.164 1.308** (0.068) (0.173) (0.068) (0.130) (0.256) (0.168) Year18 1.361*** 1.384*** 1.279*** 0.789* 0.793* 0.860 (0.103) (0.105) (0.105) (0.109) (0.109) (0.128) Treat#Year18 0.784*** 0.853 0.922 0.593*** 1.047 0.593*** (0.073) (0.139) (0.095) (0.102) (0.308) (0.111) Income 1.041*** 1.018 (0.011) (0.019) Treat#Income 1.056 1.787** (0.157) (0.482) Treat#Year18#Income 0.994 0.964** (0.009) (0.015) Wealth 1.051** 0.934 (0.026) (0.042) Treat#Wealth 0.887*** 1.161** (0.031) (0.071) Treat#Year18#Wealth 1.036 0.805*** (0.033) (0.048) Observations 9,964 9,964 9,964 3,010 3,010 Note: Standard errors are reported in the parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. All the regressions include a constant value and control for districts fixed effects and a set of baseline demographic and socioeconomic characteristics.
The results reported in Table 3 .1 represent the effects of program-induced changes in income and wealth on a willingness to wait for a larger monetary amount measured in a simplistic binary choice framework. In this section, we construct measures of impatience based on more elaborate questions we added in the follow-up survey to measure time preference. Thaler (1981) argues that the discount rate alters inversely with the extent of delay and size of the reward. The score of each question was estimated using the position of the alternative scheme where a study participant switches from more immediate payment (Tk. 200) to a larger future payment. A person switching later would thus receive a higher score than someone who switched sooner.
If a person does not switch to future payment at all, she receives the highest score, and one who always chooses the future payoff receives the lowest score. Therefore, the higher the score, the more impatient the respondents are likely to be. The impatience scores are denoted as the current discount rate (i.e. short-horizon -receiving the higher amount of money after three months), and future discount rate (i.e. long horizonreceiving the higher amount of money after one year and three months). Thus, we measure the effects of intervention, income, and wealth on these discount rates using negative binomial regression and report the odds ratio.
Findings in columns 1 and 4 of Table 3 .2 indicate that the program participants are likely to be two per cent less impatient in the short and long-horizon (p<0.01), respectively. Low discount rate implies that the respondents are more patient and cooperative (Curry et al., 2008) . Similar results observe using ordered logit and ordinary least square (OLS) models. The row 'Income' indicates that the higherincome women of the control households are likely to be more impatient in both short and long horizons, though the effects are not statistically significant (column 2 and 5 of Table 3 .2). The interaction term 'Treat#Income' in the same columns demonstrate that the higher-income women of the treated households are likely to be less impatient in both short (p<0.10) and long (p<0.05) horizons. Similarly, the row 'Wealth'
indicates that the wealthier women of the control households are likely to be less patient in both short and long horizons, though the effects are not statistically Bangladesh significant (column 3 and 6 of Table 3 .2). The interaction term 'Treat#Wealth' shows that the wealthier women of the treated households are likely to be more patient in both short and long horizons. However, the effect on current discount rate is only statistically significant at the 5 per cent level. These results correspond to the results presented in Table 3 .1 that the program participants are more likely to wait for one or two months for a higher amount of money.
Table 3.2 Impact on time preference (impatience) Discount rate (current/shorthorizon) Discount rate (future/longhorizon) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Treat 0.978*** 1.084 0.984*** 0.979*** 1.088 0.982*** (0.005) (0.060) (0.005) (0.004) (0.057) (0.005) Income 1.001 1.005 (0.004) (0.004) Treat#Income 0.990* 0.990** (0.005) (0.005) Wealth 1.000 1.001 (0.002) (0.002) Treat#Wealth 0.994** 0.996 (0.003) (0.002) Observations 4,982 4,982 4,982 4,982 4,982 4,982 Note: Standard errors are in the parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All the regressions include a constant value and control for districts fixed effects and a set of baseline demographic and socioeconomic characteristics.
In this section, we explore the correlation between intervention, income, and wealth with time consistency that includes present and future bias. Present bias refers to the movement to put a greater value on lesser current payment rather than to wait for a higher future payment, in a trade-off situation, however, the future bias is the opposite.
In case of present-biased preferences, a conflict may arise among future and currents activities, which in turn make a time consistency dilemma. Human beings are more impatient and likely to choose a smaller current payment instead of a higher future payment since they give higher weight for the current payment than the future one (Strotz, 1955; Ainslie, 1992; Takeuchi, 2011) . As impatience reduces into the future, present bias is also termed as diminishing or decreasing impatience (Thaler, 1981; O'Donoghue & Rabin, 1999; Frederick et al., 2002; Prelec, 2004; Halevy, 2008; Benhabib et al., 2010; Andreoni & Sprenger, 2012) that concisely contributes in the adoption of hyperbolic or quasi-hyperbolic discounting function (Laibson, 1997 ). 41 Therefore, future bias or increasing impatience entails that an individual becomes more impatient for later payment/reward since time drives into the future (Takeuchi, 2011) .
Though ample studies analyse and support present bias, few studies find future bias preference that indicates increasing impatience (Loewenstein, 1987; Read, 2001; Rubinstein, 2006; Scholten & Read, 2006; Sayman & Onc¨uler, 2009; Attema et al., 2010; Takeuchi, 2011) . 42 Using the current and future discount rates (mentioned in the previous section), we construct present and future biased preferences. If the current discount rate is higher than the future discount rate, we term this as present biased (9 per cent of the sample). 43 Similarly, if the current discount rate is less or equal than the future discount rate, we term this as future biased (16 per cent of the sample). The number of future biases is higher than that of present biases. A large proportion (i.e. 75 per cent) of the sample fall in the neutral category. Thus, we compare the respondent of present and future biased preference with those that exhibit neutral preference and measure the effectiveness of intervention, income, and wealth using model 12, 13, and 14, 41 Laibson (1997) states "hyperbolic discount functions are characterized by a relatively high discount rate over short horizons and a relatively low discount rate over long horizons". However, Direr (2020) pointed out that there is a lacking's of intensive description of present bias in the literature. 42 Future bias is more likely to be spotted when the later payment is less than four weeks (Sayman & Onc¨uler 2009) . Though future bias has been unobserved in earlier research, researchers certainly did not assume that individuals did not have a future bias preference (Takeuchi, 2011) . 43 Bauer et al. (2012) , Ashraf et al. (2006) , and Meier and Sprenger (2010) find about "one-third" of the respondents have present-biased time preferences in India, Philippines, and United States, respectively. respectively. As the dependent variables are binary, we run logistic regression and report the odds ratio.
As can be seen from columns 1 and 4 of Table 3 .3, program beneficiaries are 9 and 7 per cent less likely to be present or future biased, respectively but the effects are not statistically significant. It is to be noted that both future bias and present bias are not contradictory, and they might exist in an individual (Takeuchi 2011 ). 44 Statistics show that higher-income women of control households are likely to be 7 per cent less present bias and 3 per cent more future bias (row 'Income' of column 2 and 5, respectively). Effects are statistically insignificant. The interaction term i.e. 'Treat#Income' demonstrates that the higher income program participants are 8 and 18 per cent more likely to be present and future bias, respectively. However, the effects are not statistically significant.
While looking at the row of 'wealth', we find that the wealthier women of control households are likely to be less present (not significant) and future bias (p<0.10) than the less wealthy women of control households (column 3 and 6, respectively). The interaction term 'Treat#Wealth' indicates that the wealthier program participants are one and 11 per cent more likely to be present (NS) and future (p<0.05) bias, respectively. This empirical evidence postulates that though wealthier women of control households are likely to be less future bias when we interact this with program intervention, we find wealthier program participants are significantly likely to be more future bias i.e. they are less impatient than the non-participants. In the hypothetical intertemporal choice experiment, we find that over the long horizon, they are significantly more patient. It seems self-discipline learned through coaching and a home visit by the program staff helps the participants to be more patient. Our findings correspond to the psychological studies where authors find that lower cognitive ability is likely to be positively correlated with risk aversion and impatience (Frederick, 2005; Shamosh & Gray, 2008; Dohmen et al., 2010; Huffman et al., 2019) .
Table 3.3 Impact on present and future bias Present bias (Present bias=1; Neutral=0) Future bias (Future bias=1; Neutral=0) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Treat 0.908 0.413 0.957 0.932 0.167 0.889 (0.102) (0.494) (0.115) (0.078) (0.215) (0.080) Income 0.926 1.033 (0.085) (0.097) Treat#Income 1.083 1.183 (0.129) (0.151) Wealth 0.924 0.926* (0.049) (0.040) Treat#Wealth 1.011 1.115** (0.063) (0.054) Observations 4,166 4,166 4,166 4,538 4,538 4,538 Note: Standard errors are in the parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All the regressions include a constant value.
This section estimates the effects of intervention, income and wealth on rural women's attitudes towards risk using models 12, 13, and 14, respectively. As discussed earlier, to explore the attitude towards risk, respondents' were asked to participate in a hypothetical lottery and choose one of four options. 45 The lottery gets increasingly risky as we move across one to four. Therefore, in column 1 of
Table 3.4, we compare option 2, 3, and 4 with option 1 (i.e. higher risk vs no risk option). In column 2, we compare options 3 and 4 with options 1 and 2 (i.e. higher risk vs lower risk). In column 45 Option 1: get Tk.100 if win or even fail to win, Option 2: get TK. 200 if win and get TK.60 if fail to win, Option 3: get TK. 300 if win and get TK.20 if fail to win, and Option 4: get TK. 400 if win and get nothing if fail to win.
3, we compare option 4 with options 1, 2, and 3 (i.e. highly risk vs lower risk). Results obtained from Generalized Ordered Logistic regression and report the odds ratio. It is to be noted here that we could not control baseline characteristics and district fixed effect in this model. To check robustness, a series of logistic regression have been carried out using the baseline control variables and districts fixed effect and find results very close to these (same sign and significance level).
Findings show that after two years of intervention, the program participants are more likely to choose the riskier options which indicates that they are likely to risk lovers (Table 3 .4). Same trends observe in case of higher income and wealthier program participants, they are likely to be less risk averse. As can be seen from column 1 of Table 3 .4, program participants are about 9 per cent more likely to choose the higher risk lottery against sure amount; however, the effect is not statistically significant. While we move to the riskier lottery options, we find, program participants are about 23 and 31 per cent more likely to choose the higher risk lottery against lower risk, and the highest risk lottery against lower risk, respectively (p<0.05). Looking at the income effect using the triple differenced model 13 (columns 4-6), results show that higher-income women of treated households are more likely to choose the riskier options after two years of intervention. However, the effects are not statistically significant. Similar findings we observe in case of the effect of wealth (columns 7-9).
As depicted in column 9, the wealthier program participants are 3 per cent more likely to choose the highest risk option against the lower risk options (p<0.10). This result indicates that a higher level of wealth positively affects risk taking capability which reflects on their preference to choose the higher risk higher gain option/s against sure amount or less risky option/s. These outcomes demonstrate an increase in income and wealth decrease absolute risk aversion, while risk tolerance increases.
Chapter 3: Behavioural Benefits of Credit Transfer: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Bangladesh85
Table 3.4 Impact on attitude towards risk Higher risk vs no risk (4,3,2 vs 1) Higher risk vs lower risk (4 & 3 vs 1 & 2) Highest risk vs lower risk (4 vs 1,2,3) Higher risk vs no risk (4,3,2 vs 1) Higher risk vs lower risk (4 & 3 vs 1 & 2) Highest risk vs lower risk (4 vs 1,2,3) Higher risk vs no risk (4,3,2 vs 1) Higher risk vs lower risk (4 & 3 vs 1 & 2) Highest risk vs lower risk (4 vs 1,2,3) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) Treat 1.084 1.170** 1.204** 0.771** 0.946 1.041 1.154** 1.211** 1.182** (0.070) (0.081) (0.087) (0.097) (0.129) (0.150) (0.082) (0.092) (0.094) Year18 0.984 0.719*** 0.583*** 0.973 0.717*** 0.583*** 0.999 0.686*** 0.527*** (0.073) (0.061) (0.054) (0.072) (0.061) (0.054) (0.080) (0.062) (0.053) Treat#Year18 1.087 1.224** 1.305** 1.028 0.997 1.096 0.941 1.033 1.156 (0.099) (0.124) (0.145) (0.166) (0.177) (0.209) (0.095) (0.116) (0.143) Income 0.981* 0.990 0.992 (0.010) (0.011) (0.012) Treat#Income 1.014 0.861 0.873 (0.149) (0.136) (0.146) Treat#Year18#Income 1.002 1.011 1.010 (0.009) (0.009) (0.010) Wealth 0.988 1.037 1.080*** (0.023) (0.027) (0.031) Treat#Wealth 1.042 0.833 0.606* (0.276) (0.234) (0.180) Treat#Year18#Wealth 1.002 1.015 1.031* (0.015) (0.016) (0.018) Observations 9,964 9,964 9,964 9,964 9,964 9,964 9,964 9,964 9,964 Note: Standard errors are in the parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0. All the regressions include a constant value.
Further, in this section, we explore whether financial support, income, and wealth predict the degree of absolute risk aversion. As mentioned earlier, we adopt a hurdle model to assess the subject's willingness for financial investment and using the cross-sectional data, we get the result in two parts. One of them is the zero part and another one is the positive count part. As can be seen from column 1 of Table 3 .5, the zero part measures the likelihood of an individual's unwillingness to undertake a financial investment risk i.e. they are risk averse. The odds ratio of the zero part of the model is related to the observed probabilities of women not choosing to invest any positive amount. The positive count part, on the other hand, models the mean degree of willingness to take a risk for investment for those who opt to undertake such risks i.e. they are either risk neutral or risk lovers. The rate ratio of the positive count part represents the rate ratio of the untruncated mean, and it indicates the ratio of the two incidence rates and illustrates the percentage change of the outcome variable in the relative incidence for one unit increase in the explanatory variable.
As can be seen from column 1 of Table 3 .5, the program participants are likely to be two per cent less unwilling to take financial investment risk. However, the effect is statistically insignificant. The result from hurdle part in column 2 shows that program participants are 13 per cent more likely to invest a higher amount of money (p<0.10). This indicates the participants' degree of risk tolerance i.e. the degree of absolute risk aversion is diminishing -therefore strongly rejecting CARA preferences.
Earlier (in Table 3 .1) we demonstrate program participants are patient and here we find they are risk lovers and more likely willing for a risky investment. These correspond to the findings of Tanaka (2010) that show impatient people are not willing for financial investment. While looking at the effect of income on financial investment in column 3 and 4, we find that higher-income women of program participants are 25 per cent less unwilling for financial investment (zero part) and 26 per cent more willing to invest a higher amount of money (hurdle part), respectively. Both are highly significant at one per cent level which denotes that the higher income program participants are highly risk lovers. It may be due to the fact that higher-income allows a woman to be more willing to be entrepreneurial and initiate projects involving risky returns. In the case of wealth effect, we find that wealthier program participants are 10 per cent (p<0.01) less unwilling to take the investment risks (column 5). However, column 6 illustrates that the beneficiaries with higher level of wealth are positively but insignificantly associated with the likelihood of investing a higher amount of money (risk neutral). These results indicate higher risk-taking attitude for the treated group, as a higher amount spent for a lottery implies higher certainty equivalent.
Table 3.5 Impact on risk preferences on financial investment Odds ratio (zero part) Rate ratio (Hurdle part) Odds ratio (zero part) Rate ratio (Hurdle part) Odds ratio (zero part) Rate ratio (Hurdle part) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Treat 0.980 1.133* 17.084*** 0.111*** 1.095 1.107 (0.062) (0.076) (13.765) (0.091) (0.075) (0.079) Income 1.115* 1.041 (0.069) (0.051) Treat#Income 0.753*** 1.255*** (0.060) (0.102) Wealth 1.016 1.027 (0.031) (0.033) Treat#Wealth 0.897*** 1.000 (0.032) (0.036) Observations 4,982 4,982 4,982 4,982 4,982 4,982 Note: Standard errors are in the parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All the regressions include a constant value and control for districts fixed effects and a set of baseline demographic and socioeconomic characteristics.
Additionally, to measure risk attitude in general, the respondents were asked to report, how much risk they would like to take in general. Column 1 of Table 3 .6 shows that Bangladesh program participants are about 6 per cent more likely to take a risk in general (p<0.05).
The women of control households with a higher level of income and wealth are more likely to take a risk in general against the women of control having less income and wealth (row 'Income' and 'Wealth', respectively). This implies an increase in income and wealth increases risk tolerance though the effect is statistically significant only for the later one (p<0.01). However, the interaction term 'Treat#Income' indicates that the higher income women of treated households are 5 per cent more likely to be risk lovers in general, the effect is not statistically significant. Different from the effect of income, in case of the effect of wealth i.e. the interaction term 'Treat#Wealth' shows that in general, wealthier women of participants households are more risk averse (not significant).
Table 3.6 Impact on risk attitude in general How much risk like to take in general (1) (2) (3) Treat 1.062** 0.637 1.042 (0.030) (0.208) (0.032) Income 1.009 (0.025) Treat#Income 1.052 (0.034) Wealth 1.058*** (0.014) Treat#Wealth 0.978 (0.015) Observations 4,982 4,982 4,982 Note: Standard errors are in the parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All the regressions include a constant value and control for districts fixed effects and a set of baseline demographic and socioeconomic characteristics.
Exploring the nature of human behaviour in terms of intertemporal choice and risk aversion provides us with deep insights. We hypothesize whether higher levels of (i) income and (ii) wealth are correlated with time preference and risk attitude. The paper makes two significant contributions to the literature. First, we provide causal evidence of how an increase in wealth affects the intertemporal choice and risk aversion using a randomized controlled trial. Second, the paper contributes to the literature on the effects of microfinance on behavioural attributes.
Studies on the effectiveness of credit program on income, employment, food security, asset accumulation, and accessing and using health services are voluminous while no study assesses the impact of such transfer on human preferences. This paper provides robust evidence that the program beneficiaries exhibit more patience, and risk tolerance than the non-beneficiaries.
These are consistent across various tools of elicitation and measures of time and risk preferences.
Using two years of panel data we find, program participants are significantly more patient, and they are willing to accept a higher amount after one or two month/s later instead of today's smaller amount. Results show that the higher income and wealthier program participants are more patience i.e. they are more likely to accept a higher amount of money after one month instead of a smaller amount of money today. Findings indicate that the program participants are likely to more patient both in the short and long horizons. Similar results observed for the higher income and wealthier program participants across the horizons i.e. they are more likely to choose future payoffs both in the short and long horizons.
Our results illustrate that the program beneficiaries show both increasing and decreasing impatience i.e. they are present and future bias, respectively. However, higher-income and wealthier beneficiaries more likely to be future bias. Results suggest that these effects can only be attributed to an increase in income due to the credit transfer. Increase in income due to the 90Chapter 3: Behavioural Benefits of Credit Transfer: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Bangladesh TUP program not only enables a participant to sacrifice smaller gains today to accumulate assets, but she would also more likely to be time consistent in her choices.
In this paper, we use two direct measure of risk aversion. One of them is to ask the respondents to participate in a hypothetical lottery and the other one is to ask them how much they are likely to invest to win a TK.10,000 where they have equal chances to win or loss. Both of these measures allow us to estimate an individual's degree of risk aversion. Our empirical evidence on respondents' attitude towards risk indicates that after two years of intervention, the program participants are likely to be risk lovers i.e. they are more likely to choose the riskier options when they are asked to participate in a hypothetical lottery and choose one of four options. Same trends observe in case of higher income and wealthier program participants, they are likely to be less risk averse. These outcomes demonstrate an increase in income and wealth decrease absolute risk aversion, while increase risk tolerance, thus rejecting the constant absolute risk aversion (CARA) preference. Further, our results on whether financial support, income, and wealth predict the degree of risk aversion, we find that the program participants are likely to be more willing to take the risk of financial investment and invest a higher amount of money which indicates the participants' degree of risk tolerance. While looking at the effect of income on financial investment, we find higher-income women of program participants are highly risk lovers i.e. they are more willing for financial investment and more willing to invest a higher amount of money. Higher-income allows a woman to be more willing to be entrepreneurial and initiate projects involving risky returns. In case of wealth effect, we find wealthier program participants are risk neutral for financial investment. Moreover, specifically, in response to our questions about how much risk the respondents are likely to take in general, we find that the program participants are more likely to take a risk in general i.e. they are risk lovers. per cent live in rural areas (BBS, 2001) . As a social group, women tend to benefit less from the society due to a number of socio-cultural reasons that is underpinned by their lower status than that of men in many spheres of life (Jayachandran, 2015; Bayeh, 2016) . What is striking here is that without accepting and acknowledging an influx of women's contribution to the community, progress cannot be attained (Helen Clark, 2008) . Therefore, women's empowerment is considered as the prerequisites for poverty reduction and promoting individual entitlements (Mayoux, 2000a) . Ample studies demonstrate substantial adverse effects of women's lower level of empowerment on reproductive health outcomes, children's nutrition, and immunization (Dsouza & Bryant, 1999; Chakraborty & Anderson, 2011; Corroon et al., 2014; Egata et al., 2014; Thorpe et al., 2016) . The promotion of gender equality, rigorous development strategies and the empowerment of the women are essential for sustainable social and economic progress (Dugarova, 2018) . However, in low-income countries, women's empowerment is one of the most important issues in the process of development. The World Bank (2001) postulates that the empowerment of women should be a key aspect of all social development programs. In the context of Oman, Amzat et al. (2019) reveal a compelling influence of women's empowerment on society's growth. It is assumed that in Bangladesh, national progress and development cannot be achieved without ensuring development of half of its population. However, challenges exist in measuring women's 92Chapter 4: Customized Credit Transfer and Women's Empowerment: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Bangladesh empowerment as the notion of empowerment varies across cultures (Huis et al., 2017; Richardson, 2018) .
World Bank (2012) states gender equality as 'the heart of development' and it can be achieved by reducing the gender gaps in terms of (1) human capital i.e. education, healthcare,
(2) socio-economic and earning opportunities, and (3) expressing an opinion within the community. From 1990, women's empowerment and equality are seen as crucial for creating new forms and procedures of sustainable advancement (Handy et al., 2004) . Although the position of women has improved compared to previous decades, the socio-cultural obstacles still restrain women in getting equal opportunities in terms of employment, health care, and democratic freedoms (Sen, 2001; Duflo, 2012) . Moreover, irrespective of the latest development, six out of ten poorest individuals are females, only 16 per cent of women represented in the world's parliament, two-thirds of the girls are dropped out from school, women steadily experience violence to a great degree (UNDP, 2009). Thus, it remains essential to facilitate development programs and policies by identifying the factors that promote women's empowerment and gender equality.
A wide literature confirms that the conditional and unconditional cash transfer programs results indicate a significant impact on women's decision-making power related to household durable goods purchases, children's school attendance and health expenses, and contraception use in urban context while in rural households, no such effects detected with potential declines (De Brauw et al., 2014) . On the other hand, Peterman et al. (2015) show no impact of a cash and food transfer program on women's decision-making in Ecuador but find weakly significant impacts in Yemen, and Uganda on the sole and joint decision-making totals which are driven by cash against food transfers.
A qualitative study that insinuates that loans to women influence their perception about their position in the households which affect women's empowerment (Kabeer, 2001a) . Hazarika & Guha Khasnobis (2008) elucidate the positive effect of credit transfer to adult female household members with nutrition while Van den Bold et al. (2013) in a review report spot a mixed effect of the microfinance on women's empowerment. A substantial body of literature argues that conventional microfinance is less effective for the bottom layer of poorer clients and the effects are heterogenous (Hulme & Mosley, 1996; Mosley & Rock, 2004; Chowdhury et al., 2004; Fiala, 2013; Banerjee et al., 2015b) while transfer programs have large salutary effects on livelihoods and asset accumulation of the poor (Barrientos & DeJong, 2004; Hulme & Moore, 2007; Krishna et al., 2012; Emran et al., 2014; Banerjee et al., 2015a; Bauchet et al., 2015; Bandiera et al., 2016; Blattman et al., 2016; Bauchet et al., 2018) . To be effective, numerous authors highlight the importance of adding additional services, for example, training, flexible repayment, savings opportunity, social networking etc. with the conventional microcredit (Dowla & Alamgir, 2003; Field et al., 2012; Fiala, 2013; Shonchoy & Kuroshaki, 2014; Debnath et al., 2019; Bruno & Khachatryan, 2020) .
This study focuses on a randomized experiment conducted by BRAC's Targeting the Ultra poor (TUP) program in rural Bangladesh and examines the effect of an intervention that offers a combination of transfer and credit, rather than only transfer or only credit. 46 This 46 BRAC is the pioneer of the TUP program that targets those who are living below the poverty line, includes direct transfers of income generating livestock assets/soft loan and livelihood training, and reaches around 1.77 million extreme poor households covering 50 of 64 districts of Bangladesh since its inception in 2002.
94Chapter 4: Customized Credit Transfer and Women's Empowerment: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Bangladesh approach is referred to as credit plus approach or customized credit transfer program. To date, to our knowledge, a study on the effectiveness of the customized credit plus approach on women's empowerment is largely missing. Kabeer (2018) pointed out that a well-organized strategy and project that offer grant, asset, and loan may substantially affect women's employment potentiality, enlarge the set of opportunities and enhance the gains to own labour.
As the TUP program aims to move the poor out of poverty through economic development, it is expected that it would help the participants to boost up their ability and contribute to improving empowerment. Thus, using two years panel data, we investigate if the credit program affects on women's ability to influence in intra-household decision-making, communal cohesion, boosting consciousness for their rights inside and outside the household, competitiveness and self-confidence-a behavioural trait that women in rural Bangladesh are severely lacking in, and which is likely to be correlated with empowerment.
Findings indicate that sole and joint decision-making capabilities of female beneficiaries are likely to increase significantly on decisions related to investment (such as land purchasing/selling, house repairing/building, asset purchasing, starting a new business), and credit and savings (such as taking loan/lending out, where to save/how to spend the saved money) relative to non-participants after two years of intervention. Results demonstrate positive but insignificant influence on decisions related to children's' education and wedding.
Our empirical results highlight positively significant effects on enhancing social inclusion and improving awareness about social and legal issues while domestic violence against women is likely to decrease after the intervention. We observe beneficiaries are significantly more competitive and their competitiveness is likely to increase significantly after the intervention.
This chapter unfolds as follows: section two provides how customized credit transfer impacts on empowerment. Section three describes the experimental design, survey data, and measures of empowerment. Section four reviews the estimation model, and Section five presents result and describes how the intervention enhance empowerment of the rural poor women in Bangladesh. Section six concludes.
96Chapter 4: Customized Credit Transfer and Women's Empowerment: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Bangladesh
As is evident from showing the pathways about how the graduation model works and impacts on sustainable livelihoods. It is assumed that having adequate access to savings and credit opportunity foster women's economic empowerment through their role of decision-making for the wellbeing of the household which is a presumed consequence of women's higher level of involvement in financial activities (Mayoux, 2000b) . Several studies show that transfers to women improve empowerment along with improvement in human capital and children's outcomes; this might not happen if supports are provided to men (Pitt & Khandker, 1998; Pitt et al., 2003; 2006; Bonilla et al., 2017) . A wide literature postulates that an influx of women around the world involves in earning activities and contribute to family income to move the family out of poverty (Harkness et al., 1997) which may lead to improve women's bargaining power inside the family (Mukherjee, 2018; Schuler et al., 2018) . Moreover, Kabeer (2011) identified that women's social affiliation is as an effective strategy to enhance empowerment in the communities. Debnath et al. (2019) emphasize the importance of redesigning the conventional microcredit products in Bangladesh by providing non-monetary services that include "training on microcredit management, proper monitoring, and building up social networks". Ample
studies document the effects of microfinance with compulsory and voluntary savings opportunity, and flexible repayment system (Dowla & Alamgir, 2003; Field et al., 2012; Fiala, 2013; Shonchoy & Kuroshaki, 2014; Bruno & Khachatryan, 2020 ). BRAC's customized credit transfer program that targets poorer clients than the conventional microfinance program, provides these non-financial services from the very beginning. Weekly visits to the beneficiary's house help POs to get the pulse of the beneficiary's improvement over the program, which assist them to provide customized support strategies. The program focuses on economic aspects of the beneficiaries, such as how the participants manage the loan they received from BRAC, how new income sources can be generated, how to manage the daily income for more productive purposes etc. In case of slow improvement, beneficiary's POs invest a little bit more time and if they found that beneficiaries are getting all the targets on time, they praise them highly to boost up their confidence. That kind of support helps them to
•Material support: Soft loans Subsistence allowance •Social support: Integration at the village level Input •Technical & Life skill training •Savings opportunity •Health services Activities •Diversified income •Improved food security, asset base, hygiene and sanitation practices, Increase savings •Reduce vulnerability Outcome •Sustainable livelihoods •Empowerment Impact 98Chapter 4: Customized Credit Transfer and Women's Empowerment: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Bangladesh
develop self-worth and self-confidence. From the qualitative work for BRAC's asset transfer program, Roy et al. (2015) pointed out that these training and support not only help the women to improve financial conditions but also enable them to gain self-confidence and expand social inclusion.
The TUP program informs the beneficiaries about the resources of social services which they can get access for help increase the social relationship with others. Beneficiaries' involvement in Gram Daridro Bimochon Committee (GDBC) increases their self-esteem as GDBC is formed with the local mainstream people who are socially well accepted in local administration. 47 As ultra poor are socially isolated, disadvantaged people, when they get access to support of a local committee like GDBC, then their confidence came out and they get involved into the society without any fear, as a result, their performance moves up. Whenever any TUP beneficiaries get into trouble, they rush to GDBC for immediate help which is a big release of stress and they feel that someone from the mainstream of the society is beside them and they are not alone. Sometimes GDBC members visit TUP beneficiary's house, which is a very impressive approach in developing confidence.
No explicit instruction has been provided by the program staff about who in the family would take important decisions related to buying and selling of the asset, or even how to use the income earned from the asset. As these are assumed to determine by intra-household dynamics, we expect the non-monetary supports that are being offered by the program help the participants to build up the women's intra-household decision-making capabilities, social inclusion, knowledge about social and legal issues, interaction with formal institutions, and confidence level. The program, therefore, can affect a woman's decision-making power 47 To facilitate the communal integration, the TUP program form Gram Daridro Bimochon Committee (GDBC) for the participants so that they have a good relation with the local community. The GDBC committee communicates with the local community leaders and influencers, when needed, in accessing essential public services, and protecting their assets etc.
relative to other household members through these channels. This chapter focuses on women's empowerment.
100Chapter 4: Customized Credit Transfer and Women's Empowerment: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Bangladesh
This paper uses the same data that we have used for chapter three (discussed in section 3.2.1).
Women's empowerment is defined in most cases as few interrelated concepts like "options, choice, control, and power" because these concepts are referred to women's strategic decision-making capabilities and ability to influence both own and family's welfare (Malhotra et al., 2002) . Kabeer (2001b) defines Women's empowerment as women's capability to make important life decisions in a situation wherever this capability was refuged earlier. Numerous studies measure empowerment in terms of women's role in household decision-making (that includes farm/loan management, household expenditure, investment, purchasing of durables, children's health etc.), mobility, history of domestic violence; political, social and legal awareness, involvement in community protests and political activism, and control over income/asset (Ackerly, 1995; Goetz & Gupta, 1996; Hashemi et al., 1996; Grasmuck & Espinal, 2000; Jejeebhoy, 2000; Mayoux, 2000b; Beegle et al., 2001; Roy et al., 2015; Baird, 2016; O'Hara & Clement, 2018) . 48 A brief review of this literature that use multidimensional approaches to measure empowerment has been presented in Table 4 .1. However, these decision-making measures are criticized widely by several authors (Bishop & Bowman, 2014; Carter et al., 2014; Peterman et al., 2015) . Despite criticism, these are, still, commonly applied in evaluating programs and development research and provide their effects on empowerment (Bonilla et al., 2017) . As women's empowerment is assumed as a process of empowering women instead of a static one, we evaluate the impact of the intervention on women's empowerment on several aspects such as (1) influence in intra-household decision-making, (2) social inclusion, 48 Several studies use many of these indicators and analyse the impact of microfinance on women's empowerment in the context of developing countries including Bangladesh (Sinha, 1988; Steele et al., 1998; Hashemi et al., 1996; Pitt et al., 2006; Rahman et al., 2009; Akpalu et al., 2012; Garikipati, 2012; Yogendrarajah, 2012; Blattman et al., 2016; Duvendack et al., 2014; Banerjee et al., 2015c; Ganle et al., 2015) . (3) awareness about social and legal issues, (4) perceived domestic violence against them, and
(5) confidence level. 49 We explore who makes important family decisions. Our main outcome measure, women's ability to influence in intra-household decision-making has been used as a direct measure of women's empowerment. Respondents were asked eleven questions related to financial investment, credit, savings, children education and wedding, and household expenditure on food, health care and clothing. 50 In both waves, we asked women who in the household generally has taken the final decision across the mentioned eleven domains. For each question, there are five possible answers: (1) other family members decide (2) her husband solely decides, (3) she and other family members jointly decide, (4) she and her husband jointly decide, and (5) woman solely decides. Later, instead of one to five, we construct the scale into one to three-point scale i.e. (1) husband/other family members decide (2) she and her husband/other family members jointly decide, and (3) woman solely decides. So, the lower rank denotes respondents lower ability to influence in household decision making whereas higher rank denotes the opposite.
We quantify social inclusion in terms of whether the respondents get invitation and help from neighbours, can express their own opinion in the Shalish (i.e. village religious court), and whether villagers share/lease/mortgage land to them as it indicates the sense of being accepted in the local community and being able to take part in society's conventional activities, for example, social and religious events. Along with financial improvement, the TUP program targets to improve communal cohesion of the underprivileged rural poor women.
Comprehensive development would be difficult to achieve unless we focus on social inclusion.
For utmost development in their communities, Gadi and Farkas (2016) emphasize the 49 Women's empowerment is a process which boost up women's capability in making decisions which also again empower them (Kumar et al., 2020) . significance of women's inclusive involvement in commercial, social, intellectual, and public endeavours. We measure women's social and legal awareness in terms of their knowledge about the legal age of marriage for boys and girls, the eligible age for voting, Muslim law of property distribution, and who are the victims of human trafficking as these play a vital role in boosting up women's consciousness for their rights both inside and outside the household (Zaman, 1999; Annim & Alnaa, 2013) . Women's perceived status through domestic violence is explored to measure empowerment in the follow-up survey. Literature postulates that domestic violence is less common in low-middle income people where microcredit or cash transfer for women is accessible (Aktaruzzaman & Guha-Khasnobis, 2010; Buller et al., 2018; Peterman et al., 2018; ) . Following Gneezy et al. (2009) , we also investigate the competitiveness and confidence level of the participants using simple experimental tasks conducted in the field in the follow-up survey. These personal attitudes are likely to play a significant role in determining the success of the program.
To explore the impact of the program on competitiveness, following Gneezy et al. (2009) , we conduct an experiment with approximately 440 women who are the program beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries of the customized credit transfer approach (i.e. OTUP package). Due to budget constraint, we plan to conduct the experiment in 44 program branches (22 treatment branches and 22 control branches). We select the treatment branches purposively (from 66 branches) and prefer the nearby one of each control branch in each district.
Afterwards, we provide a list of the households to the research assistants and instruct them to invite randomly 10 participants from each branch for participation (total 44x10=440).
The respondents were informed about the experiment before experimenting and the collection of survey data. They were informed that they will play the game along with other 9 women in their community. We asked the respondents whether they are willing to participate in the experiments. They were also informed that if they think that they are not happy with the 104Chapter 4: Customized Credit Transfer and Women's Empowerment: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Bangladesh experiment, they can make a decision not to participate at any time. Participants were aware of all the payment that will be made at the end of the experiment.
The experiment is incentivized with monetary payoffs. The participants get an opportunity to earn money in the form of participation payment and the games in the experiment. They receive a fixed participant fee of AU$2 (BDT 120) as an appreciation gift for participating in this research and a variable payoff which depends on her choices/performance in each task. The task involves throwing a tennis ball and the objective is to get it in a bucket that is placed at a three-meter distance from the participants. They have 10 tries. This task has 4 parts. All the respondents faced the instructions, same decision tasks, and payoffs. They were aware before the experiment that they could earn money in the experiment and their earnings would be based on their choices. Each participant gets an opportunity to earn on average AU$4 (Tk. 240). Details of the experiment have been presented in Appendix Table C.7. An ethical clearance has also been taken from the Queensland University of Technology (QUT) before conducting the experiment.
As discussed, this study uses two years of experimental panel data, and cross-sectional field experiment data to explore the effects of the intervention on Women's empowerment. To evaluate the effect, we compare the change in the outcome variable of the program beneficiaries with the change in the outcome variable of the control group. As mentioned earlier, Women's empowerment is a multidimensional concept in several aspects, where causes and effects are difficult to differentiate (Hultberg, 2008) . Despite randomization, our models control for demographic and socioeconomic characteristics such as respondents age, education, marital status, number of children, household head's sex; such as land ownership (household owns less than 30 decimals of land), per capita income (below $1.9 at PPP exchange rate), to justify for any compositional differences in the sampled households at baseline. Therefore, any differences between the treatment and control households at follow-up that is after two years of intervention could then be inferred as the causal effects of intervention. Thus, to measure the effectiveness of intervention using two years of panel data, we use the difference-in-difference (DiD) technique and follow the models given below for binary and count variables.
To explore the impact of the intervention on respondents' ability to influence household decision-making on the above mentioned 11 issues, which are nominal in nature, we use multinomial or polytomous logistic regression model -an addition of the binomial logistic regression model to compare each of the alternatives with other.
The multinomial logistic regression deals with situations with several categories, the dependent variable is dummy coded into various 1/0 variables. Based on the number of categories, there is a variable for all categories except one. Several authors use this model in such kind of situation (Campbell & Donner, 1989; Demaris, 1992; Cabrera, 1994; Menard, 2000; Rajendran et al., 2007; Mala et al., 2010; El-Habil, 2012; Kim & Park, 2019) . 51 The way it works is to select one of the response categories as a reference. Thereafter, compute log-odds for all the other categories in comparison to the reference category. Thus, the multinomial logit model connects to the log-odds of each response in comparison to the reference category in linear form as:
where + # is a constant, -. = (-4 , -6 , … -8 )′ is a vector of explanatory variables and / # is a vector of regression coefficients, for j = 1,2, …, J-1. The J-1 multinomial logit models compare each of categories 1, 2, … J-1 with category J. In our example, with J=3 categories (i.e. (1) husband/other family members decide (2) she and her husband/other family members jointly decide, and (3) woman solely decides), we use category (1) as the reference category and contrast categories (3) versus (1), and ( 2 ) versus (1). We could run a series of binary regression models but run them together using multinomial regression models that are estimated simultaneously gives more efficient results with less error. From model 20, following Kim and Park (2019) and Campbell and Donner (1989) , we get the probability as:
It is to be noted that using Stata software, we use 'mlogit' command for multinomial logistic regression output and report relative risk ratio (RRR) which is 51 Campbel and Donner (1989) compare Anderson's ordinal logistic regression model (Anderson, 1984) with the multinomial logistic model and demonstrate the classification efficiency of the later one relative to the former. obtained by exponentiating the multinomial logit coefficients. If the RRR is positive i.e. greater than 1, it indicates that an increase in the risk of the explanatory variable increases the risk of the outcome falling in the comparison group relative to the referent group. Inversely, if the RRR is negative i.e. less than 1, it indicates that an increase in the risk of the explanatory variable decreases the risk of the outcome falling in the comparison group relative to the referent group.
Thus, to capture the effect of intervention using two years of panel data, we estimate the following linear difference-in-differences model for each outcome I "JK of individual L measured in district M at time t (baseline in 2016 (t = 0) and followed up in 2018 (t = 1)):
Where : "J is a dummy variable denoting respondent from program participant household L. T denotes survey wave and the parameter P is the double-difference estimator of the average program effect. X represents a vector of the respondent and household characteristics at baseline (i.e., in 2016); District-level fixed effects are controlled through a set of district dummies U J , and V "JK represents an error term for individual L in district M at year W.
To explore the impact of the intervention on social inclusion, awareness about social and legal issues, perceived domestic violence against them, and confidence level which are dichotomous, we use a binary logistic regression model. Using panel data, we estimate the following linear difference-in-differences model for each binary outcome I "JK of individual L measured in district M at time t (baseline in 2016 (t = 0) and followed up in 2018 (t = 1)):
I "JK = N + / 4 : "J + / 6 O K + P(O K * : "J ) + RS "T + U J + V "JK (23)
To estimate the impact of the intervention using cross-sectional data collected in the follow-up survey to assess women's perceived status on violence against them and their confidence level, we use the following model:
Where I "J is the outcome variable for individual L in district M.
We start by exploring who makes important intra-household decisions using model 22 and eliminate those households where only the women reside in the households since she takes all the decisions. As mentioned earlier, the respondents were asked eleven questions to capture their perceived ability to influence households important decisionmaking. Using two years panel data, here we investigate whether participant women's sole and joint decision-making capabilities on these domains increase over time against non-participants and compare women's sole and joint decision-making capabilities with no decision-making capability i.e. husband/other family members decide, separately. Using multinomial logistic regression, we obtain these results from the same regression and report the results in two columns (i.e. sole decision-making capability vs others decide i.e. category 3 vs 1, and joint decision-making capability vs others decide i.e. category 2 vs 1) for each indicator. In the context of Zambia, Kafle et al. (2019) pointed out the necessity of revealing women's both sole and joint decision-making capabilities that imply increasing empowerment; otherwise, it would distort the true effect of the intervention on decision-making and empowerment. We present the results of these 11 indicators under four broad categories such as decisions related to (1) financial investment, (2) financial market participation, (3) children's education and wedding, and (4) households healthcare expenditure.
As can be seen from raw 1 of Table 4 .2 (i.e. Treat), the women of treated households have significantly less sole or joint capability to influence in households important decision-making related to investment at baseline. While the row 'Year18' shows that except column 1 and 2 (for the first indicator), the women of control households have less sole and joint decision-making capabilities in 2018 compared to baseline (i.e.
2016). The interaction term 'Treat#Year18' reveals the 'program effect' after two years of intervention which indicates (column 1) that the relative risk of program participants sole decision-making capability on land buying/selling, leasing in/out is likely to increase by a factor of 2.69 after two years of intervention (p<0.01) against the women of control counterparts. While the relative risk of program participants joint decision-making capability on the same is expected to increase by a factor of 1.81 (p<0.01) after two years of intervention (column 2). The relative risks of program participants sole and joint decision-making capabilities on house repairing/building are likely to increase by a factor of 2.43 and 2.24 (p<0.01) after two years of intervention, respectively (column 3 and 4). Similarly, decision-making capabilities related to asset purchasing, we find that the relative risk of program participants sole and joint decision-making capabilities are likely to increase by a factor of 2.13 (p<0.01) and 1.30 after two years of intervention, respectively. Our results are somewhat similar to the impact of a conventional microcredit program where authors observe positive and significant influence on durable family expenditure in China (li at al., 2011) . Blattman et al. (2016) also show a positive effect of the cash and microenterprise support on empowerment in terms of purchasing decisions including durable assets in Uganda. However, the relative risk of program participants sole and joint decision-making capabilities on starting new income-generating activities (IGAs) are likely to increase by a factor of 2.58 and 1.21 after two years of intervention, respectively against the non-participants. It is apparent in Table 4 .2 that the magnitudes of the effects are higher in case of sole decision-making capabilities than the joint decision-making capabilities.
Columns 1 and 2 of Table 4 .3 illustrates that the relative risk of program participants sole and joint decision-making capabilities on outstanding loan taking/lending out are likely to increase significantly by a factor of 1.99 and 1.50 after two years of intervention, respectively. In the context of Ghana and urban Malaysia, Ganle et al. (2015) and Al-shami et al. (2018) show that microcredit enables the women making decisions related to the loan. Like asset purchasing and starting a new IGAs, the relative risk of program participants sole and joint decision-making capabilities relative to husband/other family members on where to save/how to spend the money are expected to increase by a factor of 3.53 and 1.62 after two years of intervention (p<0.01) (column 3 and 4). These indicate that program participants have more control over savings which correspond to several studies conducted by Li et al. (2011) and Rahman et al. (2015) in China, and Debnath et al. (2019) in Bangladesh.
In this section, we measure the impact of the intervention in terms of participants ability to influence on important issues related to children. While estimating the effect, we eliminate those households where a particular decision is not applicable i.e. if there are no school-age/unmarried children live in the household, the respondent does not exist in the analysis for that specific domains. Results show the positive but insignificant influence of women beneficiaries on decisions related to children's education and wedding. Specifically, the relative risk of program participants sole decision-making capability on their children's education is likely to increase by a factor of 1.62 after two years of intervention (column 1 of Table 4 .4) against the women of control households. While the relative risk of program participants joint decision-making capability on the same is expected to decrease slightly by a factor of 0.992 (NS) after two years of intervention (column 2 of Table 4 .4). The relative risks of program participants sole and joint decision-making capabilities on son or daughter's wedding are likely to increase by a factor of 1.70 and 1.36 after two years of intervention, respectively (column 3 and 4). However, the effects are not statistically significant. Mounting literature reveals the significantly positive effect on microcredit borrowers ability to influence in deciding about children education relative to nonborrowers (Li et al., 2011; Rahman et al., 2015; Al-shami et al., 2018) .
Table 4.4 Impact on influence in decision-making related to children Decisions related to Son/daughter's education Son/daughter's wedding Sole vs others (3 vs 1) Joint vs others (2 vs 1) Sole vs others (3 vs 1) Joint vs others (2 vs 1) (1) (2) (3) (4) Treat 0.841 0.955 0.864 0.727* (0.284) (0.238) (0.251) (0.132) Year18 0.497* 0.792 0.455** 0.626** (0.183) (0.202) (0.154) (0.120) Treat#Year18 1.616 0.992 1.697 1.365 (0.719) (0.309) (0.688) (0.321) Observations 5,790 9,467 Pseudo R-squared 0.1266 0.1570
Notes: ***, **, and * denote significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Average-Treatment-on-the-Treated (ATT) estimates are reported based on a difference-in-difference specification estimated using multinomial logistic regression and reported the relative risk ratio (RRR). All the regressions include a constant value and control for districts fixed effects and a set of baseline demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. We eliminate those households where only the women reside in the households. Additionally, we eliminate those households where a particular decision is not applicable. If there are no children of school age/unmarried reside in the household, the woman does not appear in the analysis for those particular domains (N=5790 and 9467), respectively.
Finally, we explore the program participants sole and joint decision-making capabilities on household expenditures such as food, clothing, and healthcare. From the results, it is clear (column 1 of Table 4 .5) that the relative risk of program participants sole decision-making capability about food expenditure is likely to increase significantly by a factor of 1.47 after two years of intervention against the women of control households (p<0.10). While the relative risk of program participants joint decision-making capability on the same is expected to increase by a factor of 1.11 after two years of intervention (column 2 of Table 4 .5). However, the effect is not statistically significant (NS). The relative risks of program participants sole and joint decision-making capabilities about expenditure on healthcare are likely to increase by a factor of 1.03 and 1.19 after two years of intervention (NS), respectively (column 3 and 4 of Table 4 .5). Similarly, decision-making capabilities related to expenditure on clothing, we find that the relative risks of program participants sole and joint decisionmaking capabilities are likely to increase by a factor of 1.31 and 1.15 after two years of intervention, respectively against non-participants (column 5 and 6). However, no statistical significance is determined. Though Li et al. (2011) show no impact on the microcredit recipient rural women's ability on purchasing cloth and furniture, we observe the significantly positive effect on asset (reported in
Table 4.2) and cloth purchasing but the later one is not statistically significant. Banerjee et al. (2015a) get short term effect of the asset transfer program on Women's empowerment related to health expenditures while Al-shami et al. (2018) highlight the positive effects of microcredit on daily and health expenditure. However, the effects are mixed. In a systematic review, authors claim that nearly all researches are not methodologically effective and demonstrate microfinance beneficiaries have no control over household spending (Vaessen et al., 2014) . Table 4.5 Impact on influence in decision-making related to healthcare expenditure Decisions related to Expenditure on food Expenditure on healthcare Expenditure on clothing Sole vs others (3 vs 1) Joint vs others (2 vs 1) Sole vs others (3 vs 1) Joint vs others (2 vs 1) Sole vs others (3 vs 1) Joint vs others (2 vs 1) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Treat 1.772*** 0.967 2.181*** 0.993 2.132*** 1.055 (0.230) (0.103) (0.337) (0.104) (0.346) (0.111) Year18 0.072*** 0.653*** 0.157*** 0.650*** 0.226*** 0.657*** (0.015) (0.070) (0.036) (0.069) (0.052) (0.070) Treat#Year18 1.472* 1.107 1.029 1.195 1.308 1.151 (0.345) (0.151) (0.279) (0.163) (0.348) (0.159) Observations 9,935 9,935 9,935 Pseudo R-squared 0.1598 0.1457 0.1093
Notes: ***, **, and * denote significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Average-Treatment-on-the-Treated (ATT) estimates are reported based on a difference-in-difference specification estimated using multinomial logistic regression and reported the relative risk ratio (RRR). All the regressions include a constant value and control for districts fixed effects and a set of baseline demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. We eliminate those households where only the women reside in the households (N=9935).
To check robustness, we use ordered logistic regression to assess the impact on influence in household decision making for all the four broad categories such as decisions related to (1) financial investment, (2) financial market participation, (3) children's education and wedding, and (4) households healthcare expenditure in addition to the multinomial logistic regression discussed above. The higher the score, the more the respondents are likely to have the sole decision-making capability for each indicator. Annex
Tables C.2, C.3, C.4 and C.5 present the results on the impacts on financial investment, financial market participation, children's issue, and healthcare expenditure using ordered logistic regression, respectively. We observe almost the results using ordered logistic regression as we notice using multinomial logistic regression for all the indicators except the indicators under healthcare expenditure. Annex Table C .5 shows that the risk ratios of the healthcare expenditures on food, clothing, and healthcare are less than one which indicate that the program participants are likely to have less sole decision making capabilities. However, the effects are not statistically significant for any of the healthcare expenditures.
As empowerment indicators, the above findings elucidate the impacts of the intervention on each of these indicators. Furthermore, we construct an empowerment index taking all the indicators. We have summed up the score of all the indicators for each respondent and divided by the total number of indicators. The value of the index lies from 1 to 3. Same as indicator wise analysis, in cases where a particular decision is not applicable
(for instance, children's schooling/wedding decisions when no school-age/unmarried children reside in the household), the respondent does not exist in the analysis for that specific domains and has been dropped from the composite analyses. We also eliminate those households where only the woman resides in the households, as she takes all the decisions. Thus, the index indicates women's overall empowerment. Employing ordinary 118Chapter 4: Customized Credit Transfer and Women's Empowerment: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Bangladesh least squares (OLS) regression for the outcome of Women's empowerment index, we identify (Table 4.6) that women of program participant households have 3 pp more sole capability over important household decision-making after two years of intervention against the women of non-participant households (p<.01). The six randomized evaluations of microfinance conducted by Banerjee et al. (2015b) show the positive effects of microcredit on Women's empowerment in Mexico. Extensive studies demonstrate the positive impact of microcredit on women's empowerment in the less developing countries including
Bangladesh (Hashemi et al., 1996; Steele et al., 1998; Pitt et al., 2006; Rahman et al., 2009; Akpalu et al., 2012; Garikipati, 2012; Blattman et al., 2016; Ganle et al., 2015) . However, et al. (2019) observe no relationship between microcredit and Women's empowerment in India.
Table 4.6 Impact on women's overall empowerment Impact Treat -0.002 (0.008) Year18 -0.050*** (0.009) Treat#Year18 0.030*** (0.011) Observations 9935 R-squared 0.1334 Notes: ***, **, and * denote significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Average-Treatment-onthe-Treated (ATT) estimates are reported based on a difference-in-difference specification estimated using OLS regression. The regression includes a constant value and control for districts fixed effects and a set of baseline demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. Standard errors in parentheses.
While the above results reflect empowerment within the household, we use measures of social inclusion to proxy for empowerment outside the household based on whether the respondents get invitation/help from neighbours, can express their own opinion in the Shalish (i.e. in the village religious court), and they feel that the villagers share/lease/mortgage land to them. We capture the impact of the program on social capital using the logistic regression (model 23) and report the odds ratio that indicates the ratio of two incidences. 52 Table 4 .7 provides evidence that, participant women are 1.13 times more likely to receive invitations to social occasions from non-relative neighbours, the effect is positive but statistically insignificant. The participant women are 27 per cent more likely to get help (if requires) from non-relative neighbours during crisis and needs after the intervention against the non-participants (p<0.05). The odd of program participants' ability to express their own opinion in the village religious court is likely to 2.75 times higher against non-participants (p<0.01). The likelihood that the villagers would share/lease/mortgage land to the TUP beneficiaries also increases by 22 per cent (p<0.01). Blattman et al. (2016) identify the positive effect of the cash and microenterprise support on community participation i.e. the program participants are more likely to receive support from the community, participate in community events etc. From the qualitative work, Roy et al. (2015) show the effect of transfer program on enhancing "intangible benefits" i.e. social status both inside and outside the households. Moreover, Banerjee and Duflo (2007) postulate that communal networks, in practice, work as unofficial insurance.
52 If p1 is the probability of a positive count for the group that received program support and p2 is the probability of a positive count for the group that did not receive the support, the two groups are then compared using the odds ratio (OR = [p1/(1-p1)]/[p2/(1-p2)]).
This section explores the association of program participation with their awareness about some important social and legal issues using model 23. Women's level of awareness about social and legal issues should not be ignored because these are assumed to promote consciousness to realize their rights. As can be seen from
Table 4.8, program participants knowledge about the legal age of marriage for boys increases by 51% after two years of intervention against the non-participants (p<0.01). Effect on participant women's knowledge about the legal age of marriage for girls is positive but insignificant. The odds of program participants awareness about the eligible age for voting, Muslim law of property distribution, and who are victims of human trafficking are likely to be 1.31, 1.70, and 1.37 times higher than the control counterparts after the intervention (p<0.01). The above results show the impacts of the intervention on each of the dichotomous indicator of social and legal awareness. Additionally, similar to Women's empowerment index, we construct an awareness index taking all these indicators. Findings demonstrate (Table 4 .9) that, women from the intervention areas are 7 pp more aware of the social and legal issues compared to the women of non-intervention areas (p<.01). Our findings also correspond with Li et al. (2011) which demonstrate that the microcredit is positively associated with the social and legal awareness of China's rural women.
Using cross-sectional data, this section measures whether the intervention influences violence against women. Reviewing empirical evidence, Heise (2011) postulates that restraining only to microfinance programs are not enough to address the pressing issue of domestic violence without empowering women. From both quantitative and qualitative exploration, Kim et al. (2007) also shed light on the issue and report that women's levels of financial and communal empowerment play a significant role in diminishing "intimate partner violence". As discussed in section 4.5.1 that credit injection improves overall empowerment of the rural poor women, here we explore the women's perceived status within the household using model 24. Information was collected from those who are married and living with husband in last one year. Descriptive statistics on these key outcomes are presented in Annex Table C.6
Impact estimates confirm that the participant women are less likely to be tortured by her husband in last one year than the non-participants. The respondents were asked to report whether their husband forbade them for going outside work, we observe the odd ratio is 1.008 which is very close to 1 (Table 4 .10), implies no impact in this regard (not statistically significant (NS)). Results reveal that the program participants are 16 per cent less likely to get a threat from their husband for physical torture during the period (p<0.10). The incidence that husband got angry on the program participants is 33 per cent less likely to happen compared to the control counterparts (p<0.01). The incidences that husband slapped and tortured the participant women and did not get back home in that night are 0.6 and 15 per cent less likely to happen compared to the non-participants (NS). The incidence of husband insulted the program participants are 33 per cent less likely to happen compared to the non-participants (p<0.01). Interestingly, it is apparent from the results that the likelihood of participant women's husband never raised voice against her if anyone insulted her is 12 per cent less against the control counterparts. However, the effect is not statistically significant. The incidences of a husband got angry seeing the participant women talking with other males (nonfamily member) is 31 per cent more likely to happen compared to the non-participants (NS). It may be due to the fact their husband feel insecure as the participant women are more involved in financial activities and more likely to take decision independently. The odd that participant women are always worried about their husband's word/activities is likely to increase by a factor of 1.03 which is very close to 1, indicates no effect in this regard (NS). In the context of rural Bangladesh, it is very common that women remain a bit worried about their husband's word/activities. It is difficult to change this within the short duration of intervention. Ganle et al. (2015) enlighten the same by stating that long years male dominance over women cannot be eliminated by the women's immediate involvement in a microfinance program. However, a study elucidates that these types of programs that directing resources to families through women are likely to reduce women's vulnerability to family violence (Schuler et al., 1998) . Matjjako et al. (2020) postulate that microfinance is an important approach that can restrain violence. Qualitative evidence also suggests that improvement in the level of empowerment is likely to perceive a salient factor that decreases intimate partner violence (Schuler et al., 2013) .
Table 4.10 Impact on violence against women Indicators Impact Forbade her for going outside work 1.008 (0.151) Threat her for physical torture 0.843* (0.085) Got angry on her 0.673*** (0.059) Slapped her 0.994 (0.112) Husband tortured her and did not get back home in that night 0.845 (0.239) Insulted her 0.672*** (0.060) Never raised voice against her if anyone insulted her 0.880 (0.078) Got angry seeing her talking with another male (nonfamily member) 1.305 (0.352) Always worried about your husband's word/activities 1.028 (0.103) Observations 2,339 Notes: ***, **, and * denote significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Average-Treatment-on-the-Treated (ATT) estimates are reported based on the cross-sectional data using logistic regression and reported odds ratio. Each odds ratio corresponds to a separate regression. All the regressions include a constant value and control for districts fixed effects and a set of baseline demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. Standard errors in parentheses. For this section, eligible women are those who are married and living with husband in last one year.
Niederle and Vesterlund (2007) measure the competitiveness among male and female participants and observe that men are more competitive than women. However, Gneezy et al. (2009) experimented two distinct societies i.e. in Tanzania and India and reveal that Tanzanian's patriarchal society's men are more competitive while India's matrilineal society's women are more competitive than India's and Tanzania's men. As Bangladesh is a country of a patriarchal society (Ali, 2012) , women are assumed to be less competitive. However, in this section, we explore whether financial independence affects the competitiveness of rural poor women. As can be seen from Panel A of Table 4 .11, the odd that participant women choose the competition rate to play is likely to be 1.53 times higher than the control counterparts (p<0.05). Participant women are 1.19 times more likely to choose the competition rate for payment, however, the effect is not statistically significant. Respondents were asked to predict
their position based on their performance in part 1 (piece rate scheme) and part 2 (competitive rate scheme). The response was collected on a 1 to 10 points scale where the lower scale that is '1' denotes higher position and '10' denotes lower position. Results obtained from ordered logistic regression demonstrate that program participants are less likely to choose the lower position (i.e. the highest rank) in both piece rate and competitive rate schemes against the non-participants, but effects are statistically insignificant.
Table 4.11 Impact on competitiveness ATT ITT Panel A: Chose competition rate to play 1.528** 1.582** (0.321) (0.319) for payment 1.189 1.260 (0.321) (0.326) Panel B: Predicted their position based on their performance in part 1 0.930 0.927 (0.166) (0.160) performance in part 2 0.959 0.956 (0.171) (0.166) Observations 404 440
Notes: ***, **, and * denote significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Average-Treatment-on-the-Treated (ATT) and Intent-to-treat (ITT) estimates are reported based on crosssectional data using logistic and ordered logistic regression for panel A and Panel B, respectively. The odds ratios shown are the treatment effect. Each odds ratio corresponds to a separate regression. Standard errors in parentheses. Observations indicate the number of eligible women surveyed in the follow-up survey. From baseline data, for this experiment, we provide a list of the participants and ask the research assistants to select them randomly from each branch. After the follow-up survey, we find 36 finally selected eligible women (out of 220 program participants that were invited for the experiment) in the treatment branches refuse to receive support from the program. However, to check robustness we conduct ITT and observe a similar result.
This study focuses on a randomized experiment conducted by BRAC's Targeting the Ultra poor (TUP) program in rural Bangladesh and examines the effect of an intervention that combines the availability of credit with supports offered through transfer programs on Women's empowerment. The program provides a soft loan with additional support services such as training, stipend, health subsidy to the main female of the household. Using two years of panel data, this study investigates whether the decision-making capability of the TUP beneficiaries changed as a result of the customized credit injection. Despite randomization, we estimate the effects of the intervention using difference-in-difference after controlling for respondent's sociodemographic characteristics that capture individual and household level heterogeneity.
The primary measure of empowerment is based on respondents' reported influence in household decision-making related to land purchases, savings, children's education and wedding, and household expenditure. We additionally use measures of social inclusion to proxy for empowerment outside the household based on whether the respondents get invitation/help from neighbours, can express their own opinion in the Shalish (village religious court), and feel that the villagers share/lease/mortgage land to them. We measure women's social and legal awareness on social and legal issues as it plays a vital role in boosting women's consciousness for their rights inside and outside the household. Women's perceived status through domestic violence and confidence level has also explored to measure empowerment assuming that these personal attitudes are likely to play a significant role in determining the success of the program. We investigate if the credit program had an effect on competitiveness and self-confidence-a behavioural trait that women in rural Bangladesh are severely lacking in, and which is likely to be correlated with empowerment.
Results cast a new light that sole and joint decision-making capabilities of the female beneficiaries are likely to increase significantly on decisions related to investment (such as land purchasing/selling, house repairing/building, asset purchasing, starting a new business), and credit and savings (such as taking loan/lending out, where to save/how to spend the saved money) against nonparticipants after two years of intervention. Results show positive but insignificant influence on decisions related to children's education and wedding. Beneficiaries overall empowerment, social inclusion, awareness about social and legal issues, and self-confidence are likely to increase significantly over the year. Findings indicate that domestic violence against women is likely to decrease after the intervention relative to control counterparts.
Though the headcount and multidimensional poverty trends (discussed in Chapter 1)
show remarkable progress in poverty reduction in recent decades in Bangladesh, a large part of its population still lives under poverty and deprived of all or any of the three non-income dimensions (education, health, living standards). Using data from multiple waves of a Randomized Controlled Trial, this thesis evaluates the impact of BRAC's "Targeting the Ultra-Poor" -an anti-poverty program involving asset and credit transfers and multidimensional support for the targeted ultra-poor households.
The program consists of two intervention packages: (1) Specially Targeted Ultra-poor (STUP) package, a support package that transfers asset as a grant, and ( 2 ) Other Targeted Ultra-poor (OTUP) package that provides a soft loan. My studies focus on both of these intervention packages. As the support packages target the main female of the household, we assume that the grant and the loan would potentially affect the financial and behavioural outcomes of both the recipients and their children. These impacts may be in the form of changes in (i) children's time allocation to education and income-generating activities, (ii) own preferences that matter for economic decision-making, and (iii) the control of intra-household decision-making, self-esteem and self-confidence. This thesis investigates these three domains.
Using seven years of panel data from the TUP program, the first study explores the short, medium and long-run impact of the program on the time allocation between study and work among the children of program beneficiaries. Results show that the program had a non-monotonic effect on the study time of the children: study time is likely to decrease in the short run and increase in the long run. This effect, however, is statistically significant for boys only. As we do not find any significant difference in years of education and school dropout for the children of participant and non-participant households across all waves, the above results propose the long-term impact of attaining more days in study must have offset the short-term reduction in study time. Our findings corroborate the Beckerian model of time allocation: in the short run, asset transfer expands the earning opportunities inducing substitution of study time for work, especially among the boys who are better suited to supplementing labour. Eventually, as income rises the income effect dominates, raising demand for education and study time. Ample studies show that households access to credit market directs to reduce or defer school enrolment, and increases unexpected consequences of child labour (Wydick, 1999; Menon, 2004; Shimamura & Lastarria-Cornhiel, 2010; Augsburg et al., 2012; Lakdawala, 2018) . The higher opportunity cost of schooling/study time of the children is one of the channels that lead their childen into labor market. In deciding on children's time allocation, a low income household typically faces a difficult trade-off between current income generating activities and
schooling. An injection of income generating asset increases the shadow price of schooling in the short run, incentivising the parents to engage their children in income generating activities (Edmonds & Theoharides, 2020; Del Carpio et al., 2016; Fumagalli & Martin, n.d.) . Indeed, we find that the likelihood of a child adopting The second study explores a question that relates to the effects of an antipoverty program that extends beyond poverty reduction and investigate whether assettransfer programs improve economic decision-making by influcing the preferences of the program beneficiaries. In particular, we examine the program impact on time preference and risk attitude in the financial domain and provide the first RCT-based causal evidence, to the best of our knowledge, of incremental effects of wealth on intertemporal choice and risk aversion. Using two years of panel data, we find that the program beneficiaries exhibit reduced time preference (higher level of patience), and risk aversion (higher appetite for risk) than the non-beneficiaries. These are consistent across various tools of elicitation and measures of time and risk preferences. These findings are rich in policy implications. First, our results offer first-hand evidence that credit plus approach intended to reduce poverty of the participants lead to more patience and more willingness to take risks that are critical inputs to any enterpreneurial activity. This is, obviously, a significant additional benefit of such interventions. Previously it was thought that patience and risk-attitudes are immutable human traits. Patience is one of the desired behavioural attributes that is positively associated with individual's personal and financial well-being. Several studies show that patience is positively corelated with subjective well-being, whereas impatience is positively associated with depression and more physical complaints (Spence et al., 1987; Schnitker & Emmons, 2007; Schnitker, 2012; Schnitker et al., 2020) . The critical role of patience is well-understood in increasing financial well-being, in particular, in promoting saving. Higher saving and investment are the two most critical ingredients of income generation process through small business/self-employment.
Thus, the asset-transfer program may help by not just allowing household-based micro-enterprises to establish, but also in promoting behaviour necessary to succeed in these ventures.
In poor societies households face a multitude of uninsurable risks, which discourage them from undertaking entrepreneurial work. Substantial evidence postulates that an individual who is likely to take risk is supposed to be an entrepreneur and invest larger amount in personal enterprise (Zhao, Seibert, & Hills, 2005; Ahn, 2010; Caliendo, Fossen, & Kritikos, 2010; Fossen, König, & Schröder, 2020) . The credit plus approach allows more financial risk taking, enabling these households to undertake small business operations, rather than opting for wage employment. This is beneficial for the whole society as businesses, however small, create employment.
Similar to the second study, the third study uses two rounds of panel data from the same randomized experiment that investigates whether the credit plus approach impacts on Women's empowerment. Findings show significantly positive effects of the program on boosting the participant women's intra-household decision-making capabilities, communal cohesion, awareness of their rights both within and outside of the household, competitiveness and self-confidence. These are assumed to be the essential behavioural attributes among economically excluded rural women of Bangladesh. Our results also indicate that domestic violence against women is likely to decrease due to the intervention. Women's empowerment that strengthen the position of a woman in a society is assumed to play a key role in achieving the sustainable development goal. In the context of low-income societies, Devis et al.
(2014) demonstrate that pregnant women with greater levels of empowerment are likely to experience less pregnancy-related health problems while non-pregnant with greater levels of empowerment are likely to experience more health problems -a differential effect of women's empowerment on health;. Women's empowerment positively and significantly influences the normal level of children's health (Vildö, 2017) . However, to achieve collective development, women's empowerment is essential for bridging the societal gender gap (Gadi & Farkas, 2016) .
Overall, the results of these three studies provide some strong theoretical and empirical insights. From a policy point of view, the findings show that a well-targeted asset and credit transfer program may confer behavioural and personal benefits that accrue over and beyond what is commonly measured in terms of income and consumption.
In the development economics domain, it is important to get a comprehensive understanding of how economic factors shape the human behaviour, for example, how increase in income affect intra-household time allocation decisions, beneficiaries time preference and risk attitude, ability to influence housheolds decision making, social inclusion, and awareness about social and legal issues. We analyze the causal effects in the short run i.e. after two years of intervention. In terms of future research possibilities, an additional, and possibly more interesting question would be to examine the causal effects of income and wealth on rural women's behavioral and personal benefits in the long run. This would require the recollection of data for another two rounds (in every two years). Moreover, it would be interesting to explore the time preference and risk attitude of the university students using the measures that have been used in the second chapter.
Table A.3 Status of the treatment and control households at baseline, by non-attrition Non attrited over attrited Indicators Both group Treatment Control Housing condition (dilapidated=1; Otherwise=0) -0.039*** -0.038*** -0.062*** Amount of cultivable land 0.134 -0.061 0.437 Amount of homestead land 0.433*** 0.368*** 0.596*** % of hhs have homestead land 0.085*** 0.089*** 0.088*** % of hhs have own house 0.052*** 0.060*** 0.044*** % of hhs always face food deficit -0.030** -0.040*** -0.030 % of hhs have outstanding loan 0.019** 0.009 0.033** Note: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 Table A.4 Total working days on different occupations of the sampled children by treatment status and year Employment activity 2007 2009 2011 2014 Treatment Control Treatment Control Treatment Control Treatment Control Panel A: Age 5-16 years 238.7 242.3 241.3 254.5 253.7 261.2 193.0 194.9 Study 1,770 1,066 2,044 1,261 2,216 1,324 2,427 1,385 Observations HH chores 28.4 28.9 26.8 25.3 18.9 20.3 13.6 13.1 Agri-self employment 29.0 30.5 105.1 38.8 80.1 37.0 56.1 37.8 Non agri-skilled 18.2 19.7 16.3 16.8 14.2 13.2 19.9 15.3 Unskilled work 27.0 33.4 16.2 17.8 15.4 19.4 12.1 15.2 Observations 2,482 1,552 2,701 1,639 2,746 1,680 2,948 1,702 Panel B: Age 5-8 years (at baseline) Study 229.6 236.9 241.5 257.4 259.4 272.5 202.3 205.9 Observations 779 461 708 422 687 401 515 300 HH chores 2.1 0.4 8.7 8.1 18.4 17.4 27.5 23.1 Agri-self employment 8.9 11.2 63.0 20.2 78.4 29.6 93.3 60.4 Non agri-skilled 0.7 0.6 1.8 0.9 8.2 5.5 26.1 18.6 Unskilled work 1.6 2.8 3.5 2.6 5.4 8.4 15.4 24.5 Observations 811 484 740 440 751 439 684 399 Table A.5 Impact on study time (days/yearly) of the younger children at baseline (Balanced panel) Both Girls Boys (1) (2) (3) 2 year post-intervention -7.85 * -11.65 -4.74 (4.70) (7.54) (5.97) 4 year post-intervention -5.27 -13.63 1.84 (5.24) (8.28) (6.69) 7 year post-intervention 1.94 -10.22 12.95 ** (4.19) (6.48) (5.49) Observations 3508 1651 1857 R-squared 0.252 0.237 0.286 Note: Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 Table A.6 Impact on working days (yearly) in different occupations of the younger children at baseline (Balanced panel) HH chores Agri-self work Skilled work Unskilled work Panel A: Both 2 year post-intervention 2.16 44.18 *** 0.64 -0.13 (2.50) (6.97) (0.62) (0.86) 4 year post-intervention -0.96 53.27 *** 2.56 * -0.39 (4.23) (8.61) (1.36) (1.03) 7 year post-intervention -1.94 44.57 *** 3.60 * -0.50 (4.83) (9.52) (2.17) (1.50) Observations 3508 3508 3508 3508 R-squared 0.040 0.137 0.057 0.021 Panel B: Girls 2 year post-intervention 5.84 43.26 *** 0.49 -0.83 (5.14) (11.01) (1.05) (0.89) 4 year post-intervention -1.94 72.21 *** 1.96 -2.24 (8.55) (13.64) (2.15) (1.69) 7 year post-intervention -0.52 53.88 *** 7.58 ** 0.35 (9.08) (14.61) (3.81) (0.24) Observations 1651 1651 1651 1651 R-squared 0.088 0.166 0.091 0.043 Panel C: Boys 2 year post-intervention -0.87 46.93 *** 0.85 0.52 (0.89) (8.83) (0.75) (1.40) 4 year post-intervention 0.12 38.62 *** 3.14 * 1.30 (1.37) (11.02) (1.85) (1.22) 7 year post-intervention -0.03 38.34 *** -0.07 -1.73 (1.28) (12.29) (2.12) (2.95) Observations 1857 1857 1857 1857 R-squared 0.017 0.132 0.032 0.030 Note: Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 Table A.7 Impact on different employment activities (day/yearly) of the grant recipient women _Pooled panel HH chores Agricultural self-work Non-agri skilled work Unskilled works (1) (2) (3) (4) 2 year post-intervention -4.51 274.40 *** -6.45 ** -9.95 ** (3.10) (12.17) (3.23) (4.59) 4 year post-intervention -11.93 *** 227.75 *** 2.79 -24.14 *** (2.95) (12.38) (2.99) (4.85) 7 year post-intervention -0.40 165.31 *** 3.42 7.71 (6.89) (12.78) (3.12) (4.83) Observations 10389 10389 10389 10389 R-squared 0.253 0.325 0.121 0.238 Note: Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 Table C.4 Impact on influence in decision-making related to children Decisions related to Son/daughter's education Son/daughter's wedding (1) (2) Treat 0.901 0.882 (0.156) (0.121) Year18 0.707* 0.671*** (0.131) (0.101) Treat#Year18 1.262 1.283 (0.282) (0.240) Observations 5,790 9,467 Notes: ***, **, and * denote significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Average-Treatment-onthe-Treated (ATT) estimates are reported based on a difference-in-difference specification estimated using ordered logistic regression and reported the risk ratio. All the regressions include a constant value and control for districts fixed effects and a set of baseline demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. We eliminate those households where only the women reside in the households. Additionally, we eliminate those households where a particular decision is not applicable. If there are no children of school age/unmarried reside in the household, the woman does not appear in the analysis for those particular domains (N=5790 and 9467), respectively. Table C.5 Impact on influence in decision-making related to healthcare expenditure Decisions related to Expenditure on food Expenditure on healthcare Expenditure on clothing (1) (2) (3) Treat 1.439*** 1.489*** 1.425*** (0.106) (0.125) (0.121) Year18 0.336*** 0.516*** 0.571*** (0.028) (0.046) (0.052) Treat#Year18 0.891 0.856 0.969 (0.090) (0.096) (0.110) Observations 9,935 9,935 9,935 Notes: ***, **, and * denote significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Average-Treatment-onthe-Treated (ATT) estimates are reported based on a difference-in-difference specification estimated using ordered logistic regression and reported the risk ratio. All the regressions include a constant value and control for districts fixed effects and a set of baseline demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. We eliminate those households where only the women reside in the households (N=9935).
Table C.6: Descriptive statistics on vialence against women Indicators Treatment Control Forbade her for going outside work 9.22 9.15 Threat her for physical torture 22.4 25.5 Got angry on her 50.6 60.4 Slapped her 17.84 17.93 Husband tortured her and did not get back home in that night 2.17 2.56 Insulted her 31.5 40.6 Never raised voice against her if anyone insulted her 59.64 62.68 Got angry seeing her talking with another male (nonfamily member) 3.16 2.44 Always worried about your husband's word/activities 25.28 24.76 Observations 1,519 820 Table C.7 Competition game and decision sheet Competition Game Welcome to this study of decision-making. The instructions are simple, and if you follow them carefully, you can earn a considerable amount of money. All the money you earn is yours to keep and will be paid to you, in cash, immediately after the experiment ends. In addition to any earnings you might have in this task, you will be paid Tk. 120 to participate. The participants will get an opportunity to earn more money. The game will be conducted at branch offices in the presence of all the 10 participants. The experiment will last approximately 1 hour depending on your cooperation. You can decide not to participate at any time if you think that you are not happy with the experiment. ALL payments will be made at the end of the experiment.
This task has 4 parts. At the end of the experiment, we will decide which part will be chosen for the payment for EVERYONE in the room by tossing a coin. We will invite one participant to come out here and pick a card with a number between 1 and 4 from a box. The number that gets picked will denote the part which gets picked for payment. Participants will not be allowed to watch or discuss each other's performance.
You will be participating in a group of 10 players.
The task involves throwing a tennis ball and the objective is to get it in a bucket that is placed 3 meters away from you. You will have 10 tries. Part 1: You will throw a tennis ball into a bucket. For each throw of the ball that stays in the bucket, you will receive Tk.10. You will have 10 tries to throw the ball into the bucket. If you succeed to place one ball into the bucket you will get Tk 10. If you succeed to place 2 balls into the bucket you will get Tk. 20, and so on. Part 2: In Part 2, you will again throw a tennis ball into a bucket. Once again, you will have 10 tries to get as many balls in the bucket as possible. However, now the PAYMENT will be different. If you score in the top third of throws that landed in the bucket for all participants in your group, you will receive Tk.30 for each correct throw (ball lands in the bucket). Otherwise, you will receive Tk. 0. Part 3: In Part 3, you will choose which payment scheme (Part 1 scheme of receiving Tk.10 for each correct throw, or Part 2 scheme of receiving Tk.30 if ranked in the top third in your group) will be used to pay for your future performance. Then you will again have 10 tries to throw as many balls as possible into a bucket. Part 4: In part 4, you do not have to throw any balls. You will be reminded of how many correct throws of the ball you made in Part 1. Then you choose how you want to be paid for those correct throws. You can choose to pay like in Part 1 by receiving Tk.10 for each correct throw. Alternatively, you can choose to be paid like in Part 2 by receiving Tk.30 for each correct throw if your rank is in the top third of all participants in your group, and Tk. 0 otherwise.
Finally, you will be asked to guess your rank in Part 1 and Part 2. So if there are 10 participants in your group, you will guess your rank between 1 and 10.
Procedure:
• You will be asked to go into the private booth at the corner and bring with you the "ID number" and the "Decision sheet#1". In the booth, you throw balls in the bucket from a fixed distance of 3 meters and try to get as many as you possibly can. A successful shot meant that the tennis ball entered the bucket and stayed there. You will get a maximum of 10 chances. Remember you will receive Tk.10 for each correct throw.
• Next, the research assistant will record how many balls are in the bucket and your ID number on the decision sheet under "Part 1 Score".
• Then you will again throw balls in another bucket from the same distance and try to get as many in as you possibly can in 1 minute. Remember now you will receive Tk.30 for each correct throw only if you are in the top third of all group participant scores and will receive nothing is you are not in the top third.
• Next, the research assistant will record how many balls are in the bucket on the decision sheet under "Part 2 Score".
• Now, you will choose one of the above payment schemes (like in Part 1 or Part 2). The payment method you choose will now be applied to the number of balls you can now get into a bucket. After your time is over, the assistant will record the payment scheme you chose and the number of balls you were able to throw in the bucket under "Part 3 decision and score".
• Next, the research assistant will remind you how many balls you got in the bucket in Part 1 and ask you to choose a payment method that you like to be applied to this result. So, you can choose to be paid as in Part 1 or as in Part 2.
The assistant will tick the appropriate box on the decision sheet under "Part 4
Decision".
• The assistant will ask you to guess your rank in the room among all participants in your group for Part 1 and Part 2, and record them under "Rank in Part 1" and "Rank in Part 2".
Then the assistant will put the decision sheet inside a box. Then you can go back to your seat. Please keep in mind that you are not allowed to discuss or let other participants know about your score. Do you have any questions? If you are ready, we will proceed. Please remain seated until we invite each of you one by one to go to the booth. Research Assistant invites the participant to the booth. Decision sheet DECISION SHEET PARTICIPANT ID: Branch number: Spot number: Household number Part 1: Please throw as many balls as you can inside the bucket. You will have 10 tries. You will receive Tk.10 for each ball thrown in the bucket. 1. Balls thrown in the bucket: ________________. 2. Total balls thrown: _______________________. 3. Total amount payable: _____________ Part 2: Please throw as many balls as you can inside the bucket. Again you will have 10 tries. You will receive Tk. 30 for each ball thrown in the bucket only if you are ranked in the top third of all participants in this part 4. Balls thrown in the bucket: ________________. 5. Total balls thrown: _______________________. 6. Respondent's rank among all participants (1 st , 2 nd , 3 rd ,..10 th ):________________. 7. Did the respondent select for payment (Yes=1; No=0) :________________. 8. Total amount payable: _____________ Part 3: Please choose a payment scheme that will be applied to your next performance of getting as many balls in a bucket as possible. You will receive Tk.10 for each ball thrown in the bucket if you choose payment scheme as in Part 1. You will receive Tk 30 for each ball thrown in the bucket only if you are ranked in the top third of all participants in this part if you choose payment scheme as in Part 2. o Payment scheme 1 o Payment scheme 2 9. Balls thrown in the bucket: ________________. 10. Total balls thrown: _______________________. 11. Respondent's rank among all participants (1 st , 2 nd , 3 rd ,..10 th ):________________. 12. Did the respondent select for payment (Yes=1; No=0) :________________. 13. Total amount payable: _____________ Part 4: You got ________ balls in the bucket in Part 1. Please choose a payment scheme that will be applied to this performance. You will receive Tk.10 for each ball thrown in the bucket if you choose payment scheme 1. You will receive Tk 30 for each ball thrown in the bucket only if you are ranked in the top third of all participants in this part if you choose payment scheme 2. o Payment scheme 1 o Payment scheme 2 14. If choose payment scheme 2, write the rank of the respondent (1 st , 2 nd , 3 rd ,..10 th ): _________ 15. If choose payment scheme 2, did the respondent select for payment(Yes=1; No=0) :_______ 16. Total amount payable: _____________ 17. Please guess your rank among all participants in Part 1 (1 st , 2 nd , 3 rd ,..10 th ): _________ 18. Please guess your rank among all participants in Part 2 (1 st , 2 nd , 3 rd ,..10 th ): _________
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All the regressions include a constant value and control for sub-districts fixed effects and a set of baseline demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. All outcomes are measured at the individual level.
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All the regressions include a constant value and control for sub-districts fixed effects and a set of baseline demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. All outcomes are measured at the individual level.
Note: Standard errors in parentheses.*
*
102Chapter 4: Customized Credit Transfer and Women's Empowerment: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Bangladesh
Notes
Notes
Notes
In this phase, 300,000 ultra poor households were covered from the 40 poorest districts of Bangladesh.
Around 5,00,000 STUP and 5,00,000 OTUP households have been covered in Phase II and Phase III of the TUP program.
This supervision performs a crucial role to confirm that the participants are being operative and enjoy ownership. This close and longer period supervision is rare in other social protection programs operated in Bangladesh.
Similar findings observe using the balanced panel (see AppendixTable A.5)
According to Bauer et al. (2012) , "offering large investments is a better way to characterize the risk aversion of expected utility maximizers".
This indicates, in the short duration, an individual can be future bias, and in the long duration, the same person can be present bias.
124Chapter 4: Customized Credit Transfer and Women's Empowerment: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Bangladesh