Introduction
Multidimensional poverty index
Program evaluation
Data
Results and the robustness test
Conclusion
Table 2
Table 1
Table 3
Summary statistics of normalized shortfalls.Average normalized shortfalls if the values of the dimensions of well-being are below the poverty threshold (α = 1 in Eq. (
Robustness tests.
Measuring the effectiveness of anti-poverty programs has gained increased urgency as governments work to reduce poverty in order to meet the United Nation's Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Historically the standard metric of program effectiveness has been income (per capita), and indeed one of the MDGs is halving the number of people living on less than a $1 a day (PPP) by 2015. 1 However, in recent years policymakers in both developed and developing nations have stressed the need to focus on how policy affects multiple dimensions of well-being. This is because in many cases, measuring poverty status of a person based on their earned income may yield some perverse results. For example, suppose there are three dimensions of well-being -income, consumption and health -and that a person earns income above the poverty line. Using a headcount ratio or the income-gap ratio or any other poverty measure that uses income as a dimension to measure poverty, the person is said to be non-poor. However, the person may be suffering from a serious illness that requires substantial out-of-pocket medical expenditures for treatment and so, after medical expenses are met, the person's remaining income may fall well below the poverty line. Therefore, this person's discretionary consumption level is the same as that of a person living in poverty, even though their income is above the poverty line. It would be logical to consider this person to be in poverty, but the typical income poverty measure would not count this person as poor. 2 Thus, a central challenge is on how to quantify poverty across multiple dimensions and then evaluate the effectiveness of interventions across multiple outcomes. To address the first issue, economists have developed multidimensional poverty indices (MPI) (Alkire and Foster, 2011; Alkire and Santos, 2011; Bourguignon and Chakravarty, 2003 ). To answer the second issue, I combine a version of the MPI with the econometrics of program evaluation to assess the effectiveness of a large-scale experiment to combat chronic poverty in Bangladesh.
The first step is to select an appropriate MPI, and there are many versions available to choose from (Alkire and Foster, 2011; Alkire and Santos, 2011; Bourguignon and Chakravarty, 2003) . I use the following extension of the Foster et al. (1984) index (Bourguignon and Chakravarty, 2003) as an illustration:
where, m is the number of dimensions being used to assess poverty of individuals/households, x ij is the level of the dimension of wellbeing of individual/household i who is living in poverty, z j is a predetermined level of the poverty line of dimension j, I ij () is an indicator function that is equal to 1 if x ij < z j , and 0 otherwise, a j is the weight given to each dimension, and n is the total number of people/households in the community. α is a number which gives different measures of poverty. 3 Among the many different versions of MPI available, I choose another version to illustrate the robustness of my results. I use another version of the multidimensional poverty measure that also Bourguignon and Chakravarty (2003) .
(2)
In Eq. ( 2 ), all parameters are the same as that in Eq. ( 1 ) except for the addition of θ, which represents a substitutability parameter. As θ increases, the substitutability between the dimensions decline.
The next step is to apply a version of the MPI to evaluate the effectiveness of a program. Programs that do not involve random placement of individuals in the treatment and the control groups confront the challenge of ''re-creating'' the experimental environment. One common way of evaluating non-experimental programs is by using the technique of matching. It involves comparing the outcome of a program participant (Y 1 ) with those of certain 3 When α = 0, P α (X; z) becomes the MPI headcount ratio, and it measures the average deprivation of dimensions per person. When α = 1, P α (X; z) is the poverty gap ratio, which measures the average normalized shortfall among the dimensions of all the individuals/households in the sample. When α = 2, the measure is called the squared-poverty gap, and it measures the average normalized shortfall of the dimensions of well-being, like the P 1 (X; z) measure, but in this case, it puts more weight on poorer people in the community. As α → ∞, increasing weight is placed on the worse-off individuals. So, this shows that, for a given α, the higher the value of P α (X; z) the higher is the poverty in that community.
4 A referee pointed out that other available versions of the multidimensional poverty measures can be used to illustrate the main findings and the robustness of the results. I do acknowledge that other versions can be used to show the importance of using multidimensional poverty measures in evaluating programs with multiple outcomes. However, I used the measures from Bourguignon and Chakravarty (2003) because they are very similar to the widely-used Foster et al. (1984) measure, relatively simple to implement and explain to policymakers and they have been shown to satisfy most of the axioms of a proper multidimensional poverty measure (Lasso de la Vega et al., 2009) .
non-participants (Y 0 ) that have similar characteristics as the participants. Any difference in the outcomes between the participants and the non-participants can be said to be due to the impact of the program. Heckman et al. (1998) show that the estimated gain of a participant from the program, after controlling for program participation (D = 1) and characteristics X is:
(3) If a particular domain of characteristics, or region of common support X , is used then the equation for the evaluation of a program becomes:
where Y 1i is the outcome of a person in the treated sample, Y 0j is the outcome for matched persons k. I 01 is the set of people in the com-
1, and N 0 and N 1 are the number of people in the treatment and the comparison group, respectively. w N 0 ,N 1 (i) is the weight given to each participant, with I 1 being the set of participants, and therefore,
One popular matching method is to use propensity scores (Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983; Dehejia and Wahba, 2002) . The basic idea is to predict the probability of program participation as a function of observables X s, and then match members of the treatment and comparison groups based only on a scalar probability value rather than matching across the potentially large dimension of X s. Although this approach controls for 'selection on observables', a potentially more robust approach that also controls for time-invariant unobservable heterogeneity is to combine matching with a difference-in-differences estimator (Smith and Todd, 2005; Todd, 2006) :
where t ′ and t are the time periods before and after the implementation of the program respectively, and W N 0 ,N 1 (i, k) is the weight given to the members of the control group that have been matched with a member of the treatment group using propensity score matching at time t ′ . The typical evaluation focuses on a single outcome, Y , and when more than one outcome is addressed it is most common to evaluate each component sequentially. In the presence of multidimensional poverty measures such as in Eq. ( 1 ) the difference-in-difference matching estimator in Eq. ( 5 ) is modified slightly by replacing Y with P α as follows:
Since a decrease in the value of P α (y; z) means that poverty level has decreased, a negative value of Eq. ( 6 ) would indicate that the program was successful.
I implement the difference-in-difference matching estimator in Eq. ( 6 ) to evaluate the effectiveness of the Targeting the Ultra Poor (TUP) program implemented by BRAC. 5 Noting that its microfinance programs to date did not really benefit the poorest women in Bangladesh, mainly due to self and social exclusion, BRAC launched the TUP program in 2002 as an experiment to help people living in chronic poverty (Hulme and Moore, 2007) .
TUP was initiated in three districts in Bangladesh-Rangpur, Kurigram and Nilphamari. 6 It created its own treated and control groups. The treated group was given training on income generation, along with education on health and well-being. Because of possible selection bias (Emran et al., 2008) , I use the official BRAC exclusion and inclusion criteria to create my own two groupsnamely, TUP1-households who received treatment and they qualified to receive the treatment; and TUP2-households who did not receive the treatment although they qualified. I find that there are 1997 households in TUP1 (treatment group), and 1667 in TUP2 (control group).
Based on data availability I use twenty-one variables as dimensions to measure poverty. The summary statistics of the variables of the treatment group and the control group in the base year 2002 are illustrated in Table 1 . These values are the average normalized shortfalls if their values are below the poverty threshold (α = 1 in Eq. ( 1 )). A value closer to 1 shows a higher degree of deprivation in that dimension.
The main results of the difference-in-difference with matching are illustrated in Table 2 (calculation done using the codes from Leuven and Sianesi, 2003) . I estimated Eq. ( 6 ) in the following steps: (1) I use a logit regression for predicting treatment (1 if the person was selected in the program, 0 otherwise) at baseline 7 ;
(2) with these estimates, I construct the predicted probability, or propensity scores, and then the treatment and the comparison groups are matched using kernel density matching 8 ; (3) I then implement difference-in-differences with matching (Eq. ( 6 )). The control group matching weights are from an Epanechnikov kernel estimator. The first row shows the difference of the average value of poverty scores between treatment and the weighted control group for the year 2002. The difference is very small, which shows that the matching between the treated and the control group was effective. The average difference-in-difference with matching estimate shows that the program helped to reduce poverty in the treated group by just above 18 percentage points when compared to the comparison group across all three poverty measures. 9 Compared with the results in Appendix Table A.1, which illustrates the difference-in-difference using matching results when only household income is used to evaluate the effectiveness of the program, 5 BRAC used to be the acronym of Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee, but currently, it is no longer an acronym. It is a large non-governmental organization based in Bangladesh that focuses on development work and has a number of development programs in Afghanistan, Bangladesh, East Africa and Sri Lanka (Hulme and Moore, 2007) .
6 The full explanation of the TUP program can be found in Matin et al. (2004) .
7 The regressors predicting treatment are assumed to be independent of the outcome of interest. The regressors selected are age, age squared, number of crises faced, number of crises faced squared, earners in household, beds in household, amount of land owned, amount of land owned squared, tubewell owned by household, cow/bull owned by household and present value of house. 8 The working paper version, available on request, has the full description of the steps taken and the results of the logit regression done in the first step. I use PSMATCH2 of Stata to do the kernel density matching. 9 The difference-in-difference estimator with matching does not correct for possible time-varying unobserved heterogeneity. If this form of heterogeneity is random then it averages to zero in the sample and has no effect on my estimates. If it is not random then it may affect the treatment effect. Because data is limited to two years, I cannot address this added complication in this model.
the results in Table 2 are much larger in absolute value (about 8 percentage points). This shows that including other dimensions of well-being provides a much broader insight on the effectiveness of the program than using just income as a sole determinant of wellbeing.
In Table 3 , I report the results of some alternative specifications First, I examine the sensitivity of the results by applying different weights across each dimensions of P α (X, z) from Eq. ( 1 ). Suppose a social planner is interested in reducing income, food, and health deficits compared to hardship along other dimensions. For this, I place a weight of 0.2 each on per-capita income, food deficit rating, and self-reported health dimensions, and a weight of 0.0222 on the remaining 18 dimensions. I then recalculate the poverty measures using these new weights and apply difference-in-difference with matching. The results shown in Table 3 indicate that the poverty reduction of the TUP program continues to be substantial, but declines to about 15 percentage points from the original 18 points (from Table 2 ). This suggests that in this example too little weight is given to other non-food, health, and income dimensions where great strides were made by the treatment group relative to the comparison group.
In the second specification of Table 3 , I alter the poverty threshold values, z, of the cardinal values used in constructing P α from Eq. ( 2 ). The threshold values of all the cardinal values were doubled (per-capita income, amount of male and female clothing, amount of winter blanket, cow and goat numbers, number of poultry and land area owned). The ordinal values were not changed. The results show that poverty decreased by about 15.5-17.5 percentage points in the treated group depending on poverty measure. Indeed I find that the effect of changing the thresholds has the greatest effect on the poverty gap compared to the baseline, and least effect on the cubic poverty gap. This is expected because even though raising the thresholds added some families to poverty, adding more weight to the more deprived families minimizes the effect of raising thresholds because these more deprived families are far below the line.
In the third specification, I use Eq. ( 2 ) instead of Eq. ( 1 ) as a poverty measure. The results indicate that the program was able to reduce poverty by about 20 percentage points among the treated group when comparing them to the control group. The table reveals that the baseline estimate of 18 percentage point reduction in poverty is quite robust to substantial changes in the specification of the poverty measure.
This paper shows how multidimensional poverty measures can be combined with non-experimental program evaluation estimators to assess the overall effectiveness of an intervention that has multiple outcomes. Using the Targeting the Ultra Poor program implemented in Bangladesh as an example, I find that the TUP program reduced overall poverty among the chronically poor by around 18 percentage points, which is about 8 percentage points higher when compared to the results if only income is used to measure the effectiveness of the program. This shows that multidimensional program evaluation is an attractive tool to guide policymakers in identifying the effectiveness of comprehensive anti-poverty programs. 1 )). A value closer to 1 shows a higher degree of deprivation in that dimension.
The effect of TUP from difference-in-difference with matching estimator.
Variable Year Poverty gap Squared gap Cubic gap TUP1-TUP2 2002 0.0171 0.0195 0.0208 (0.0032) (0.0032) (0.0033) TUP1-TUP2 2005 -0.1685 -0.1668 -0.1655 (0.0047) (0.0047) (0.0048) Difference-in-Difference -0.1856 -0.1864 -0.1864 (0.0057) (0.0058) (0.0058) Standard errors in parenthesis. TUP1 is the treatment group and TUP2 is the comparison group. The numbers represent the average difference between the treatment and control groups. The negative value indicates that the poverty measure has decreased. Standard errors are in parenthesis. Standard errors in parenthesis. TUP1 is the treatment group and TUP2 is the control group. The numbers represent the average difference between the treatment and control groups. The negative value indicates that the poverty measure has decreased. For different weights: the weights on per-capita income, food deficit rating and self-reported health were 0.2 each, while the rest were given a weight of 0.0222 each. For different poverty threshold: the threshold for per-capita income was increased to 14 000, both male and female clothing were increased to 4, winter blanket increased to 1, cow and goat increased to 1, hen increased to 2 and land increased to 20 decimals.
Table A.1 Difference-in-difference with matching estimator using only income dimension to measure well-being. Variable Year Poverty gap Squared gap Cubic gap TUP1-TUP2 2002 0.0069 0.0070 0.0066 (0.0075) (0.0082) (0.0080) TUP1-TUP2 2005 -0.1048 -0.0957 -0.0817 (0.0088) (0.0080) (0.0071) Difference-in-Difference -0.1117 -0.1028 -0.0883 (0.0081) (0.0081) (0.0076)
Standard errors in parenthesis. TUP1 is the treatment group and TUP2 is the comparison group. The numbers represent the average difference between the treatment and control groups using only household income as the dimension of well-being. The negative value indicates that the poverty measure has decreased. Standard errors are in parenthesis.
Based on the recommendation of a 1995 National Academy of Sciences (NAS) panel, the Census Bureau is producing a Supplemental Poverty Measure whereby out-of-pocket medical expenses are subtracted from income when calculating income poverty. This has a large effect of nearly doubly poverty among the elderly http://www.census.gov/hhes/povmeas/methodology/supplemental/research/ Short_ResearchSPM2010.pdf. 0165-1765/$ -see front matter © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2013.12.032