METHODS
Participants
Procedures
Measures
Statistical Analysis
RESULTS
Outcomes
Intervention Impacts
Pathways Analyses
Robustness Check
Average-Treatment-on-the-Treated Analyses
Perpetrators
DISCUSSION
Conclusions
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
"
3 12 5
but were generally 2
TABLE 1 -
TABLE 1 -
TABLE 2 -
TABLE 3 -
TABLE 4 -
examined in bundled interventions targeted to adolescents comprising components related to economic strengthening, life skills, and strengthening health capabilities, but the evidence is mixed. Interventions in sub-Saharan Africa show reductions in forced sex in Uganda (Livelihood Empowerment for Adolescents), physical or sexual violence in Zimbabwe (Shaping the Health of Adolescents in Zimbabwe) and Kenya (Adolescent Girls Initiative), and reduced participation in transactional sex in Zambia (Adolescent
plus" components targeted to adolescents. We used a sample size calculation to determine the number of clusters required (Appendix A, available as a supplement to the online version of this article at http://www.ajph.org). Randomization Random assignment of 130 villages into study arms (65 intervention and 65 control) was conducted in July 2017, after completion of the baseline surveys, and was stratified by TASAF administrative areas (program administrative areas, corresponding to Mafinga and Mufindi districts in Iringa, and Rungwe and Busokelo districts in Mbeya) and village size (large vs small villages).
to strengthen youth productive, human, and health assets (Conceptual Framework in Appendix B, available as a supplement to the online version of this article at http://www.ajph.org). Guiding principles included government ownership, implementation within the PSSN livelihoods enhancement strategy and existing government frameworks, linkages with other government services, and age-and gender-sensitive livelihoods interventions. The intervention comprised (1) faceto-face livelihoods and life skills training delivered 2 hours per week over 12 weeks (January-May 2018); (2) mentoring (occurring biweekly and then monthly between July 2018 and March 2019) and a productive grant (totaling US $80 disbursed in up to 2 payments between March and June 2019), conditional on having attended trainings and developing an approved educational or business plan; and (3) facilitated linkages to adolescent-friendly HIV and sexual and reproductive health services in government health facilities (July 2018-March 2019; Appendix C, available as a supplement to the online version of this article at http://www.ajph. org). The training included sessions on livelihoods, sexual and reproductive health, and HIV prevention and treatment, including a bundle of high-impact behavior change communication approaches and peer support groups (topics summarized in Appendix C). During mentoring, adolescents were provided with linkages to training and apprenticeship activities, input on business plans, peer education, and linkages to health facilities (Activities in Appendix D, available as a supplement to the online version of this article at http://www.ajph.org). Two mentors (1 male, 1 female) were selected per village. Addressing supply of health services, UNICEF worked with the Ministry of Health, Community Development, Gender, Elderly, and Children to perform a training in July 2019 with staff at government primary health care facilities in treatment villages to strengthen adolescent-friendly services.
We added questions on violence perpetration at round 3. Binary perpetration indicators were created separately for 12-month emotional and physical violence based on items summarized in Appendix D. Intermediate pathways examined included age at first sexual intercourse, entry into marriage or cohabitation, engaging in an age-disparate sexual relationship, self-perceived stress, self-efficacy, self-esteem, school attendance, and time use (Appendix E).
For time use, we examined participation in 5 types of economic activities performed in the past 7 days (farm work, livestock herding, fishing, nonagricultural business, paid work outside the household) and household chores performed in the previous day (collecting water; collecting firewood or other fuel materials; collecting nuts or other tree fruits; taking care of children, cooking, or cleaning; and taking care of the elderly or sick household members).
intervention effects with data separately at each follow-up round by using ordinary least squares for continuous outcomes and linear probability models for binary outcomes. For continuous and binary outcomes, we reported b coefficients. We adjusted the regression models for age, sex, and stratum (district and village size), and we adjusted standard errors for clustering and heteroskedasticity by using the VCE (robust) command in Stata version 16 (StataCorp LP, College Station, TX). We further calculated average-treatment-on-the-treated estimates by using 2-stage least squares regressions with linear probability models, in which we predicted program take up in the first-stage regressions and treatment impacts on the treated in the second stage. We tested program impacts on potential pathways of impact at rounds 2 and 3, and then tested pathway impacts by gender at round 3 only. We describe perpetrators of violence descriptively only, given low proportions in the categories of perpetrators and limited power to estimate program impacts.
mal sources vs 24.5% to informal sources). Examining indicators by gender, we found evidence for baseline balance for all characteristics and outcomes, except farm work for the household excluding livestock among female participants and experience of physical violence and informal reporting of violence among male participants (Appendix G, available as a supplement to the online version of this article at http:// www.ajph.org). By round 3, experiences of violence among the control (treatment) group were 33% (29%) for emotional violence, 13% (11.1%) for physical violence, and 6% (2%) for sexual violence (Table
55; 95% CI 5 21.02, 20.09) and a negative impact on school attendance (b 5 20.10; 95% CI 5 20.19, 0.00). This delay in sexual debut translates to approximately half a year (0.55 6.6 months).
to 3 times larger in magnitude as compared with intentionto-treat estimates (Appendices K, L, and M, available as supplements to the online version of this article at http:// www.ajph.org). We found impacts on the economic and health-related well-being stress Enhanced Life Distress Inventory subscale to be statistically significant (b 5 21.40; 95% CI 5 22.65, 20.14) in the average-treatment-on-the-treated models, but not in intention-to-treat models.
Sample Characteristics at Baseline by Treatment Status: Tanzania Adolescent Cash PlusStudy, 2017, Iringa and Mbeya Regions of Tanzania
ContinuedNote. ELDI 5 Enhanced Life Distress Inventory. Economic activities included those conducted in the previous week, and time-use activities have a reference period of the previous day.The sexual violence indicator included in this table differs from those used in impacts analyses in Tables2 and 3because of a skip pattern error at baseline, whereby only adolescents who reported having had sexual intercourse were asked questions about sexual violence. In subsequent waves, all youths in the violence module were asked questions about sexual violence, which may include other forced sexual acts.
Intervention Effects (Intent-to-Treat) on Violence at Round 3: Tanzania Adolescent Cash Plus Study, 2019, Iringa and Mbeya Regions of Tanzania
Intervention Effects (Intent-to-Treat) on Violence at Round 3: Tanzania Adolescent Cash Plus Study, 2019, Iringa and Mbeya Regions of Tanzania Note. CI 5 confidence interval. Linear probability models, by gender. Models controlled for age, gender, and stratum (district and village size); only coefficients on treatment indicator are shown. Standard errors are clustered at the community level.
Intervention Effects on Intermediate Pathway Indicators at Round 3: Tanzania Adolescent Cash Plus Study, 2019, Iringa and Mbeya Regions of Tanzania Note. CI 5 confidence interval; ELDI 5 Enhanced Life Distress Inventory. Ordinary least squares and linear probability models (intent-to-treat estimates). Standard errors are clustered at the community level. Economic activities included those conducted in the previous week, and time use activities had a reference period of the previous day. Models controlled for age, gender, and stratum (district and village size); only coefficients on treatment indicator are shown.
noncontributory social safety net programs, including cash transfers, found that social safety nets can contribute to VAC reduction. 10 More recently, studies from Mali and Zimbabwe have demonstrated that household-targeted cash plus programs reduced violence experienced by children and youths. 13, 14 Violence impacts have also been Girls Empowerment Program). [15] [16] [17] [18] Nevertheless, in Zambia, the Adolescent Girls Empowerment Program found no impacts on physical violence, intimate partner violence, or "unwanted sex," and an intervention implemented in Kampala, Uganda, found that providing girls with a savings account but no other life skills training increased the risk of unwanted sexual touching and harassment. 15, 19 When replicated in Tanzania, the Livelihood Empowerment for Adolescents intervention failed to demonstrate protective impacts, 20 while another intervention in Liberia (Girl Empower) did not lead to reductions in violence. 21 The aforementioned interventions were implemented by nongovernmental organizations, and, thus, evidence is needed on government-implemented programs, which have greater potential for sustainability and scale-up. Recent studies have called for additional research of at-scale programs to prevent violence within households, as well as programs tailored to reach adolescent girls. 22, 23 We examined impacts of the "plus" components from a government-run, multisectoral cash plus intervention on male and female adolescents' experiences and perpetration of violence.
We used data from a longitudinal cluster randomized controlled trial (n 5 130 communities), which was implemented by United Nations Children's Fund (UNI-CEF) Office of Research-Innocenti, University at Buffalo, and EDI Global, in collaboration with Tanzania Social Action Fund (TASAF), Tanzania Commission for AIDS, and UNICEF Tanzania.
The cash plus intervention was piloted in 4 districts and targeted adolescents aged 14 to 19 years living in households participating in the Government of the Republic of Tanzania's flagship social protection program, the Productive Social Safety Net (PSSN). The PSSN reaches 1 million households nationally, providing a cash transfer every other month, livelihoods enhancement, and public works. 24 Cash transfer payments were variable depending on school enrollment and health-related coresponsibilities, but these averaged US $7.10 per month (maximum US $21.70 per month), equivalent to approximately 16% of household consumption. 24, 25 All study households (intervention and control arms) had been enrolled in the PSSN since 2015 and received cash transfers. The intervention that was randomized was the
The "Ujana Salama" Cash Plus Model for Safe Transitions to a Healthy and Productive Adulthood intervention followed a capabilities approach 26, 27 We used TASAF administrative data on PSSN enrollment (in 2015) to identify households that would have adolescents aged 14 to 19 years in 2017. We approached all of these households and aimed to interview all eligible youths (including new youths not registered in the household in 2015; Appendix F, available as a supplement to the online version of this article at http:// www.ajph.org ). Three rounds of data were collected: baseline (April-June 2017), round 2 (May-July 2018), and round 3 (June-August 2019). We used a split sample approach for modules on violence victimization and perpetration for male and female participants based on best practices guidance, in which male participants answered the violence module in one community and female participants in another, to protect confidentiality of participants and reduce the chance that a perpetrator-victim pair would both be interviewed. 28 We provided anonymized referral information to respondents containing contact numbers for district social welfare officers. 29 Interviews were conducted in Swahili with same-sex enumerators in private settings and data were entered into SurveyBe version 5.10.210 (EDI Global Limited, Gerrards Cross, UK) software via tablets.
The primary outcomes were experienced violence (emotional, physical, sexual), help-seeking related to violence, and perpetration of physical and emotional violence in the past 12 months. We assessed these by using an adapted version of questionnaire items used in the World Health Organization (WHO) Multi-country Study on Women's Health and Domestic Violence, 30 which draws on the Conflict Tactics Scale. 31 We adapted these items to include any perpetrator (not just intimate partners) for the current study. Binary violence indicators for emotional, physical, and sexual violence were created from multiple items per violence type (Appendix E, available as a supplement to the online version of this article at http://www.ajph.org ). At baseline, because of an error in a dataentry skip pattern, sexual violence questions were only asked of individuals who reported ever having had sex.
In subsequent rounds, sexual violence questions were asked to all individuals selected for the violence module.
Respondents experiencing any type of violence were then asked whether they had ever tried to seek help or tell anyone about the violence. In line with existing literature, 32, 33 we further categorized help seeking into formal and informal sources (Appendix E). Age-disparate sexual relationship was defined as having a sexual partner 5 or more years older, in line with previous studies. 34 Self-perceived stress was measured using the Enhanced Life Distress Inventory, which measures distress across multiple areas of social life and functioning 35 and results in an overall scale ranging from 0 to 39 and 3 subscales (economic and healthrelated well-being, risk and security, relationships). We measured selfefficacy by using a locus-of-control index 36, 37 and self-esteem by using 2 items from Rosenberg's self-esteem scale. 38 Activities were not mutually exclusive, and multitasking was reported as separate activities. An additional pathway examined elsewhere was genderequitable attitudes. 39
As policymakers are interested in understanding population impacts, we used intention-to-treat analyses to examine impacts of the program, including all clusters and adolescents, irrespective of program uptake (uptake was 48.5% among those eligible), 40 among participants who were interviewed at all 3 rounds. We calculated
Out of 3599 adolescents found eligible at baseline, a total of 2458 completed interviews (68%). Among this baseline evaluation sample (n 5 2458), approximately half (n 5 1165) were interviewed for the violence questions, and, among these, 988 and 1033 were followed up at rounds 2 and 3, respectively, representing the panel samples (Appendix F). Among the panel sample interviewed at all 3 rounds (n 5 904), no adolescents had missing values for variables of interest. The average age of the sample at baseline was 16 years, 47.4% of the sample were female, and 57% were attending school (Table 1 ).
All background characteristics were balanced at baseline between study arms.
At baseline, 35%, 27%, and 1% of adolescents reported having experienced emotional, physical, and sexual violence, respectively (Table 1 ). Physical and sexual violence outcomes were balanced at baseline in the pooled (male and female participants) sample, while emotional violence was not (39% of the treatment group vs 31% of controls had experienced emotional violence). Among those who had experienced physical or emotional violence (n 5 404), 31.7% reported seeking help or disclosing to someone (8.4% to for- 2 ).
By round 3, treatment adolescents had a 3-percentage-point reduction of experiencing sexual violence as a result of the intervention (b 5 20.03; 95% confidence interval [CI] 5 20.06, 20.00;
Table 2 ). The intervention had no impact on emotional or physical violence experiences in the pooled sample, nor on help seeking (formal or informal sources). When examining impacts separately by gender, we saw that the sexual violence impacts were driven by the female sample, who experienced a 5-percentage-point reduction in sexual violence (b 5 20.05; 95% CI 5 20.10, 20.00; Table 3 ) as a result of the program (there were no impacts on this indicator among male participants, who reported low rates of sexual violence; Table 3 ). Impacts at round 2 are presented in Appendix H (available as a supplement to the online version of this article at http://www.ajph.org ).
In the pooled sample we found no impacts on emotional and physical violence perpetration. However, when we examined male and female participants separately, we found that male participants were less likely to report physical violence perpetration as a result of the intervention (b 5 20.06; 95% CI 5 20.10, 20.02; Table 3 ). There were no impacts on emotional violence There were no impacts on help seeking among either gender (Table 3 ).
We found positive impacts on participation in livestock herding for the household (b 5 0.09; 95% CI 5 0.02, 0.17;
Table 4) and self-esteem (b 5 0.19; 95% CI 5 0.08, 0.29). There were no intervention impacts on self-perceived stress, self-efficacy (locus of control), marriage or cohabitation, school attendance, or age-disparate relationships. When we examined pathway impacts separately by gender (Appendix I, available as a supplement to the online version of this article at http://www.ajph. org ), we saw that changes in livestock herding were driven by female participants (b 5 0.14; 95% CI 5 0.03, 0.24), while we observed increases in selfesteem for both female (b 5 0.19; 95% CI 5 0.05, 0.33) and male participants (b 5 0.29; 95% CI 5 0.05, 0.36). In addition, among female participants, we found a protective impact on delaying age at first sexual intercourse (b 5 20.
Difference-in-differences models confirmed findings from the singledifference models with respect to null impacts on emotional and physical violence (Appendix J, available as a supplement to the online version of this article at http://www.ajph.org ).
Average-treatment-on-the-treated estimates were in the same direction and maintained the same significance levels
Among those who reported emotional or physical violence at baseline (n 5 402), the most common perpetrators were peers (45%) and family members (41%), followed by partner or spouse (27%), and then authorities (21%; Appendix M). Other perpetrators were reported by only 3% of respondents. Subsequently, at round 3, those reporting physical or emotional violence (n 5 316) reported the most common perpetrators as peers (44%), partner or spouse (34%), and family members (25%; Appendix N, available as a supplement to the online version of this article at http://www.ajph.org ).
We examined the effects of a government-implemented cash plus program targeted to adolescents and found that the intervention reduced The intervention led to an increase in equitable gender attitudes (including around violence) among male participants, examined elsewhere. 39 This pathway may partly explain decreases in physical violence perpetration, as attitudes about sex, gender, normative behaviors, and hostile masculinity are learned in adolescence, 41, 43 and, thus, this is a key window to model equitable gender norms and healthy relationships. 44 These findings may have implications for reducing future violence perpetration.
Our findings are consistent with those from an intervention in Uganda 16 but are in contrast with studies from Uganda, Zambia, and Liberia that did not find protective effects against violence. 15, 19, 21 These mixed findings underscore that context matters in violence-reduction interventions, as do program design and implementation. Among the cited studies, there is variation in program components, implementing agencies, and dosage of exposure to components. It is difficult to make conclusions about which combinations are most effective in reducing VAC because few studies have tested different combinations of components, and there have been limited examples of the same program being implemented in multiple contexts. In our own study, we were unable to distinguish impacts of the individual intervention components because we could not vary program components across villages.
Studies that have evaluated impacts of cash transfers (in contrast with our study, which only evaluated the "plus" components in cash plus) have found positive impacts on school attendance, 45, 46 reductions in intimate partner violence among adolescents, 34 and reductions in other violence-related outcomes among children and adolescents. 10 These studies are not in contrast with our findings, because the interventions studied were different (cash transfers vs "plus" components).
Other studies examining effects of cash plus programs have found that these reduced violence against adolescents and youths, 14 as well as harsh discipline or corporal punishment among young children. 13, 47, 48 Limitations Generalizability of the results to all adolescents in Tanzania is limited. In
addition, the productive grant was disbursed shortly before round 3, and, thus, full impacts of the intervention may not have fully materialized. During round 3 fieldwork, households experienced a delay in PSSN payments for the first time, and this may have mitigated impacts of the cash plus program. Underreporting of violence is not expected to be correlated with treatment status and therefore should not bias impact estimates. Perpetration of physical and emotional violence was not assessed at baseline so we could not assess balance between intervention arms before program roll-out. Our study design did not allow us to disentangle effects of the different program components, and, thus, we could not conclude which components may have contributed more to violence reduction. Finally, it is possible that our subanalyses were subject to type II errors, as power is reduced as sample sizes are reduced, and ability to make conclusions about heterogeneous treatment effects is limited. A key factor in the successful implementation of this intervention was multisectoral coordination, including at the district level, where staff were based and activities were implemented. While most program components were administered through PSSN structures, health facilities strengthening was carried out by Ministry of Health, Community Development, Gender, Elderly, and Children, with technical support from UNICEF.
Multisectoral approaches are increasingly advocated to address the drivers of violence. Our study showed that a government-run, multisectoral cash plus intervention reduced violence experiences and perpetration. The broad potential reach of similar scalable interventions has implications for VAC reduction at the population level.
Tia Palermo is with the the Department of Epidemiology and Environmental Health, School of Public Health and Health Professions, University at Buffalo, State University of New York. Leah Prencipe is a PhD candidate and is with the Department of Public Health, Erasmus MC, University Medical Centre, Rotterdam, the Netherlands, and the Social and Economic Policy Unit, United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) Office of Research-Innocenti, Florence, Italy. Lusajo Kajula is with the Social and Economic Policy Unit, UNI-CEF Office of Research-Innocenti. low-and middle-income countries: conceptualization, influences and outcomes. Innocenti Discussion Papers. Florence, Italy: UNICEF Office of Research; 2017. 45. Baird S, Ferreira FHG, € Ozler B, Woolcock M. Conditional, unconditional and everything in between: a systematic review of the effects of cash transfer programmes on schooling outcomes. J Dev Effect. 2014;6(1):1-43. https://doi. org/10.1080/19439342.2014.890362 46. De Hoop J, Gichane MW, Groppo V, Zuilkowski SS, on behalf of the Productive Social Safety Net Youth Evaluation Team. Cash transfers, public works and child activities: mixed methods evidence from the United Republic of Tanzania. Working Paper Series (WP-2020-03). Florence, Italy: UNICEF Office of Research-Innocenti; 2020. 47. Roelen K, Saha A. Pathways to stronger futures? The role of social protection in reducing psychological risk factors for child development in Haiti. World Dev. 2021;142:105423. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.worlddev.2021.105423 48. Roy S, Hidrobo M, Hoddinott J, Ahmed A. Transfers, behavior change communication, and intimate partner violence: postprogram evidence from rural Bangladesh. Rev Econ Stat. 2019;101(5):865-877. https://doi.org/10.1162/ rest_a_00791
a
Note. CI 5 confidence interval. Linear probability models, male and female participants. Models controlled for age, gender, and stratum (district and village size); only coefficients on treatment indicator are shown. Standard errors are clustered at the community level.
41
This may, in part, explain why we found protective effects for sexual violence but no other forms of violence. Moreover,
AJPH December 2021, Vol 111, No. 12