Introduction
Evidence from Previous Research
General hypotheses about reintegration programs
Downstream hypothesis By improving economic welfare, reintegration programs increase ex-combatants' willingness to respect the rule of law and adopt an orientation that favors societal stability.
The Burundi context
Background to the reintegration program
The "treatment": reintegration program benefits
The source of exogenous variation: a disruption in access
Methodological Challenges
Programmatic impacts: economic reintegration
Income and poverty incidence
Livelihood
Downstream impacts: political reintegration
Preference for civilian life over combatant life
Satisfaction with the peace accords
Support for current government and institutions
Discussion
Conclusion
Individual characteristics
Father in Agriculture Prewar
Years in Faction
Non-CNDD-FDD Faction Member
Community characteristics
Log(2004 Population density)
Balance
Appendix B (to be posted online): Modeling Exposure Heterogeneity
The figure on the left shows the distribution of income (on the natural log scale) for Africare and matched control (non-Africare) observations. Distributions are shown for each of the 5 imputation-complete datasets.
FiguresFigure
Figure 2 :
Table 1 :
Table 2 :
Table 3 :
Table 4 :
Table 7 :
Table 8 :
nomic reintegration"), but also when they no longer see violence as a legitimate means to seek political or personal gain and they submit to the laws and norms of civilian society ("political reintegration"; World Bank 2002; United Nations 2000; Pouligny 2004; Hanson 2007; United Nation2010). The ability to establish good working relations with one's community or family ("social reintegration") is often taken to be an important moderator of an ex-combatant's economic and political reintegration prospects. The typical causal model posited in reintegration program documentation is: economic reintegration → political reintegration, with family-and community-level social reintegration moderating the process. Reintegration programs typically emphasize economic reintegration as their main programmatic objective, but political reintegration is usually the ultimate goal. Reintegration programs may also include reconciliation interventions that attempt to facilitate social reintegration, but these are usually secondary. Political reintegration is not directly targeted but presumed to follow from the boost that a program provides to social and economic reintegration. In this way, the programmatic economic reintegration effects are presumed to have down-stream political reintegration effects.7
Appendix A, available at www....[APPENDIX IS ATTACHED], shows sample summary statistics and balance statistics. The geographic distribution of the matched data is shown in the right panel of Figure 1. Using these matched data, we estimate
Africare and non-Africare regions as described in Appendix B available at www...[APPENDIX IS ATTACHED]. The weighted treatment effect estimates are presented as an upper bound estimate, and non-weighted estimates are presented as a lower bound. A third methodological challenge is missing data. The ex-combatant data are drawn from an original survey of civilians and ex-combatants in Burundi collected by the authors in the summer of 2007. The survey is described in greater detail in Appendix C, available at www...[APPENDIX IS ATTACHED]. As in any large scale survey such as this the data possess some missing values.
Figure 2. The results indicate dramatic effects on poverty incidence. The actual cumulative log-income distribution for Africare-region respondents is plotted with the black dots, and fitted values from the quantile regressions are given by the black line. Then, we plot the lower bound (white dots) and upper bound (gray dots) estimates of what the Africare respondents' cumulative income distribution would have been had there been no program disruption. The gray area shows the range of incomes below the poverty line. Poverty incidence among the Africare respondents is shown to be about 60% (the point where the black line crosses from the gray into the white region). The counterfactual distributions show that this would be an estimated 20 percentage points (lower bound estimate) to 35 percentage points lower had there been no disruption. We can see that this difference is not sensitive to the precise location of the poverty line. A logistic regression on a poverty incidence indicator (not shown) estimates precisely the same effect with a p-value of 0.02.
Muggah, Robert. 2009. Security and Post-Conflict Reconstruction: Dealing with Fighters in the Aftermanth of War. New York, NY: Routledge. Multi-country Demobilization and Reintegration Program [MDRP]. 2007. MDRP Quarterly Progress Report, April-June 2007. Washington, DC: MDRP Secretariat. Nindorera, Willy. 2007. "Security sector reform in Burundi: Issues and challenges for improving civilian protection." Centre dAlerte et de Prévention des Conflits and North-South Institute Working Paper. Bujumbura: CENAP. Available at www.nsi-ins.ca Paes, Wolf-Christian. 2005. "Eyewitness: The Challenges of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in Liberia." International Peacekeeping. 12(2): 253-61. Paris, Roland. 2004. At War's End: Building Peace After Civil Conflict. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Pouligny, Beatrice. 2004. The Politics and Anti-Politics of Contemporary Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Programs. Paris: CERI/SGDN. Pugel, James. 2009. "Measuring reintegration in Liberia: assessing the gap between outputs and outcomes." In Muggah R (2009). Reno, Willam. 1999. Warlord Politics and African States. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner. Republic of Burundi. 2004. Joint Operations Plan for Pre-Disarmament, Disarmament, Combatant Verification, and Demobilization. [Official document, Bujumbura, November 9, 2004.] Rubin, Donald B. 1987. Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys. New York: Wiley. World Bank. 2004a. Position Paper: Targeting MDRP Assistance: Ex-Combatants and Other War-Affected Populations. Washington, DC: World Bank. World Bank. 2004b. Technical Annex for a Proposed Grant of SDR 22.2 Million to the Republic of Burundi for an Emergency Demobilization, Reinsertion and Reintegration Program. Washington, DC: World Bank. World Bank. 2009. Emergency Project Paper on a Proposed Emergency Recovery Grant in the Amount of SDR 10,1 Million to the Republic of Burundi for an Emergency Demobilization and Transitional Reintegration Project. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Figures
Figure 2: Differences in log-income distributions and estimated effects on the cumulative logincome distribution
Estimated Sizes of Armed Forces as of January 2004
Military Status of Surviving Civil War Combatants as of June 2007
Program Access in Africare and Non-Africare Regions, Before and After NGO transition in Fall 2006 and as of the Time of Fieldwork in July 2007
Estimates from OLS regressions on log(income/month + 1)
Estimates from logistic regressions on political attitudes outcomes
Balance Statistics
Are post-conflict disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration (DDR) programs effective in achieving their programmatic aims of economic rehabilitation? Does such economic assistance make ex-combatant beneficiaries more likely to reintegrate politically and socially? We address these questions, exploiting quasi-experimental evidence from an ex-combatant reintegration program implemented in Burundi after the 1993-2004 civil war.
Post-conflict DDR programs have become key features of most peace agreements that end civil wars. According to the 2006 Uppsala Peace Agreement dataset, 36% of peace agreements struck in 1989-1999 period contained DDR provisions, while in 2000-2005, the percentage rose to 59%. foot_0 DDR programs are typically carried out alongside economic reconstruction, refugee repatriation, and democratization. All of these "peacebuilding" interventions aim to address the root causes of conflict and reduce the likelihood of another war (Boutros-Ghali 1992; Cousens et al. 2001; Paris 2004; Doyle and Sambanis 2006) .
Disarmament and demobilization, the first two components of DDR, take place before the reintegration phase in order to create the security and trust necessary for implementing peace agreements (Walter 2001; Spear 2002; Fortna 2008) and starting reconstruction (Kumar 1997; Rubin 2003; Feil 2004) . Following disarmament and demobilization the goal is for ex-combatants to find a livelihood and submit to laws and norms that govern civilian society. The fear is that demobilized combatants may have difficulty finding a productive position in the legal civilian economy and may maintain an oppositional stance toward society and government. Such marginalization may increase the propensity to engage in crime or renewed violence. As Alden (2002) remarks, "the spectre of former military personnel in criminal networks in the Balkans and Russia, the outbreak of violence inspired by real and self-proclaimed war veterans in Zimbabwe, and the participation of former security force members from Eastern Europe and South Africa in mercenaries in war-torn Angola and the Congo serve to underscore the destabilizing role played by former combatants who remain outside of the economy and society as a whole." Spear (2006) argues that among post-conflict interventions, reintegration is the most directly "linked to establishing a lasting peace"-a conclusion echoed by Castillo's (2008) argument that ex-combatant reintegration is a "sine qua non" for consolidating peace.
By providing economic benefits, reintegration programs try to make civilian life more attractive to ex-combatants and thus reduce the risk of political disorder. The presumption is that the former combatants cannot or will not achieve productive civilian livelihoods automatically. This might be due to economic barriers, such as lack of access to productive resources or a soft labor market, as well as social factors, such as an oppositional disposition from the ex-combatants themselves or discrimination by others. Reintegration programs usually include (i) short-term measures such as cash assistance or in-kind material benefits to address immediate needs upon leaving armed groups; and (ii) longer-term measures such as vocational training, seed capital, and counseling, which aim to reintegrate former combatants into the social and economic structures of society (Colletta et al. 1996; Bryden and Hanggi 2005; Muggah 2009 ).
Despite the importance of reintegration programs, there are few attempts to measure their effectiveness. Some macro-level studies exist that evaluate reintegration programming by major international institutions like the United Nations and World Bank, but they usually focus on program management and outputs. 2 Several descriptive studies focus on practical challenges plaguing the implementation of reintegration programs, 3 problems with assumptions that underpin reintegration programs, 4 , and detailed accounts of beneficiaries' experiences. 5 While useful, these studies do not measure the benefits of reintegration programs relative to their costs, including the costs of diverting resources from others in need and of apparently "rewarding" former combatants for engaging in violence (Muggah 2009) .
Two recent studies have tried to measure the benefits of reintegration programs, using large scale surveys of ex-combatants. Humphreys and Weinstein (2007) investigate the effects of a UNsponsored DDR program in Sierra Leone. They used propensity score matching on ex-combatants who did and did not enroll or complete the program. For both types of participation, these comparisons suggested no discernable effect on economic or political reintegration. Pugel (2009) conducted a similar study among ex-combatants in Liberia. Using regression analysis to control for background characteristics, Pugel found that those who had completed the UN reintegration program were significantly more likely to have a "livelihood-producing activity," although no significant effects were evident on poverty status or "spending patterns indicative of excess earning 2 See, for example, Colletta et al. (1996) and the studies contributed to the Government of Sweden's Stockholm Initiative on Disarmament, Demobilization, and Reintegration (2006) . 3 See Kingma (1997) , UNDP (2000) , Alden (2002) , Paes (2005) , Baare (2006) , and Specker (2008) . 4 See Pouligny (2004) , Muggah (2005) , and Jennings (2008) . 5 See Jennings (2007) , Soderstrom (2010) , and Uvin (2007) .
capacity." Pugel found no significant effects associated with other forms of participation in the program. In a re-analysis of Pugel's data using adjustment techniques similar to those of Humphreys and Weinstein (2007) , Levely (2010) found no significant effects of registration into the reintegration program on income, but he found some indication that enrollment and completion of the program increased income (on the order of 10%). These findings raise questions about whether reintegration programs, as currently designed, are effective at all in achieving the programmatic goal of economic reintegration, much less the downstream goal of political reintegration.
As the authors themselves admit, these studies cannot be definitive on the effectiveness of reintegration programs in Liberia and Sierra Leone, much less in general, because of weak possibilities that they offer for identifying causal effects. This by no fault of the authors, but rather by the nature of the programs. Those who do not participate in the program are likely to differ in important ways from those who do. In Sierra Leone, rates of enrollment in the reintegration program at the time of Humphreys and Weinstein's fieldwork were around 90 percent (Humphreys and Weinstein 2007) , in which case the non-participants used to construct a pseudo "control group" are a highly self-selected group. In Liberia, the rates of enrollment at the time of Pugel's fieldwork were lower-about 25%-but Pugel indicates that enrollment was voluntary. Even among subjects matched on observed covariates, there is strong reason to remain concerned about bias due to unobserved factors associated with program take-up. 6 Sekhon (2009) argues persuasively that adjustment methods, such as matching or regression, should be tied to a discontinuity or exogenous shock to make the causal story persuasive. A convincing causal interpretation requires that we can explain how two individuals who share similar observable traits may differ in their program status for reasons that will not bias the analysis. In the absence of some random shock to program access, identifying impacts of reintegration programs is a task that requires more assumptions than most people would be comfortable to make. We exploit precisely such a shock, which occurred during the reintegration program in Burundi, allowing us to measure program effects with minimal threat of self-selection bias.
The United Nations defines reintegration as "the process which allows ex-combatants and their families to adapt, economically and socially, to productive civilian life" (United Nations, 2000) .
Reintegration is thought to be critical in peace processes because it links "the more immediate requirements of disarmament and demobilization to the long-term imperatives of social and economic welfare" (Bryden and Hanggi 2005) and because it is the set of activities that facilitate effective conversion from combatant to civilian life. Effective conversion to civilian life is achieved not only when former combatants are able to establish peaceful and sustainable livelihoods ("eco- The emphasis on enhancing ex-combatants' economic welfare draws in part on the research program on the political economy of conflict (Collier and Hoffler 2004; World Bank 2002 , 2004a; Spear 2006) . In its 2003 report entitled Breaking the Conflict Trap, the largest sponsor of reintegration programs, the World Bank, claimed that "a structured DDR process, which demobilizes combatants in stages and emphasizes their ability to reintegrate into society, may reduce the risk of ex-combatants turning to violent crime or joining rebel groups in order to survive" (emphasis added). Ex-combatants may lack human and social capital endowments necessary to establish themselves in the peaceful economic sector. 8 These deficiencies may result from characteristics that set apart those who decided to participate in fighting, or they may be consequences of soldiering itself. Ex-combatants may face acute shortages of human and material capital. Time spent away soldiering may have caused ex-combatant to lose their land or other capital, and time spent soldiering may have disrupted their accumulation of material or human capital.
These deficiencies may put ex-combatants at an economic disadvantage and make them more 7 This implicit "theory" of reintegration is well articulated in World Bank (2004a), which layed the foundation for recent reintegration programming in Angola, Burundi, Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of Congo, Republic of Congo, Rwanda, and Uganda. 8 For reviews of possible sources of vulnerability among ex-combatants, see Annan and Patel (2009) and Tajima (2009) . likely to shirk the law in finding ways to support themselves. This suggestion is consistent with findings from Collier's (1994) research on demobilization and reintegration of former soldiers in Uganda. 9 Some combatants may have joined armed groups because the economic opportunity costs associated with doing so were low. Thus, as Spear (2006) notes "an emphasis on [economic reintegration] recognizes that some of the motives for fighting were economic and that if the economic dimensions of the problem are not addressed, any settlement of the conflict may be shortlived." The absence of law and order in conflict situations may provide combatants with opportunities to enrich themselves through illicit means, including robbery, racketeering and smuggling (Reno 1999) . Ending the war is tantamount to giving up these opportunities. Anecdotal evidence suggests that some combatants make these calculations. During the DDR process in Liberia, a member of the armed group, Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy (LURD) told a reporter, "I still have my 81-mm mortar, but I just come to see whether the UN was giving fighters who disarm something good, If they don't give good money, I will not give the rocket" (cited in Spear 2006) . Finally, grievances over lack of access to opportunities may have motivated a willingness to challenge the state. Providing opportunities in the legal economy may remove this motivation and, as a result, an anti-state orientation.
In our empirical analysis we test two interrelated hypotheses: Programmatic hypothesis Reintegration programs improve the economic welfare of ex-combatants, as they are programmatically designed to do.
We investigate the extent to which the reintegration program achieved its proximate aims of improving income and livelihood outcomes. We then look at whether the programs achieved its downstream aims of increasing ex-combatants' satisfaction with civilian life relative to combatant life, inducing a more positive orientation toward the peace agreement, and inducing a more positive orientation toward stable government institutions.
We focus on the reintegration of adult (18 years old or more) male former rebel combatants. Members of the national army were also demobilized and offered reintegration assistance, but we do not study them. The reintegration experience of former army members is likely to be quite different than for former rebels. Being an army soldier is a legal, well defined career. Demobilization and reintegration support is well institutionalized: certain members of the national army had access to a system of pension-type benefits that were separate to those put in place by the internationally assisted reintegration program. The legality and institutionalized nature of an army career implies that there are fewer questions about demobilized army soldiers' place in society. For these reasons, we do not think it is warranted to lump the two subgroups together. We choose to focus on reintegration of former rebels, which we believe to be of utmost interest to reintegration program designers. We focus on men only because we think women's experiences are likely to be distinct, but our sample of women is too small to study them adequately. Finally, we focus on former rebels who were aged 18 years or older as of fieldwork in 2007. Some of them were recruited before adulthood, foot_3 but they were all adults at the time of their demobilization, which could have been up to 3 years prior to fieldwork. Ex-combatants under 18 were treated by a different (UNICEFmanaged) reintegration program than adults, so their outcomes are not comparable to those above the age cut-off.
The DDR program in Burundi was initiated following a 2003-4 ceasefire that drew into the peace process the largest rebel group in the country, the National Council for the Defense of Democracy-Forces for the Defense of Democracy, or CNDD-FDD by its French acronym. At the time of our fieldwork in 2007, one rather small rebel faction-the Agathon Rwasa faction of the National Forces for Liberation, or FNL by their French acronym-remained outside the peace process. The war had begun in 1993 in aftermath of a tumultuous attempt at democratization. Elections in 1993 had resulted in the triumph of a party that represented the aspirations of a long-oppressed Hutu majority. Under still-mysterious circumstances, members of the southern-and Tutsi-dominated army led a failed coup attempt in October 1993; the coup attempt nonetheless involved the assassination of the recently-elected president. The event triggered massive violence throughout the country.
The ensuing ferment gave way to outright civil war. The war had a devastating impact on the tiny, landlocked central-African country. Fighting touched most of the country. It resulted in approximately 300,000 deaths out of a total population of 6-8 million. Burundi's pre-war socio-economic development levels were already among the world's lowest, although for its income level, the country did have relatively well-developed infrastructure and institutions. The war severely stalled development for over a decade, resulting in an estimated 20% decline in real GDP over 1993 -2002 (World Bank 2004b, p. 6) .
The outcome of the war and ensuing political developments were important features of the environment into which ex-rebels were reintegrating. The war ended in a peace accord between the government and the CNDD-FDD that called for elections. The 2005 elections resulted in the CNDD-FDD winning an comfortable majority of national assembly seats (59% of 118 seats) and communal councilor posts (55% of 3,225 posts) giving the party the strength it needed to elect its political head, Pierre Nkurunziza, president. As such, the outcome of the war brought about a near revolution in the institutionalized political context relative to before the war. As of 2005, the former rebels were elected to lead. 11
The DDR program in Burundi was part of the broader Multi-Country Demobilization and Reintegration Program (MDRP) 12 , which was intended to embody a comprehensive strategy to "enhance prospects for stabilization and recovery in the region." The World Bank's estimates for the sizes of the various forces is shown in Table 1 . Both members of the national army and the rebel groups would be demobilized. The reintegration program included several components. The National Commission for Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration (CNDRR), a Burundian gov- 11 Contrast this to outcomes in the other countries where reintegration has been studied: in Sierra Leone, the party of former rebels, the Revolutionary United Front Party, managed barely 2% of votes, failing to win a single seat in the 2002 elections that punctuated the end of the war. In Uganda, the Lord's Resistance Army is still an illegal organization, never having had its popular legitimacy tested. Though the number of cases is too small to test the claim rigorously, there is good reason to believe that conditions causing rebel parties to fair well electorally are associated with reintegration prospects of demobilized rebels. These considerations should be taken into account when trying to generalize the findings from this article.
12 Participating countries included Angola, Burundi, Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of Congo, Rwanda, Republic of Congo, and Uganda. ernment agency, directly administered a reinsertion subsistence allowance of between 30,000 to 185,000 Burundian Francs per month (FBu, with 500 FBu equivalent to 1 US 2007 dollar in PPP terms), depending on rank. This assistance was provided in 4 tranches over 18 months. Documentation from the program shows that at the time of our fieldwork in 2007, receipt of at least the first tranche was nearly universal among ex-combatants (98.5%). Also, through offices set up in nearly all provinces and through "focal points" appointed in nearly all communes, foot_4 ex-combatants had access to various forms of counseling, including psychological counseling. These too were universally available. Thus, reinsertion allowances and counseling are not sources of variation in our study.
The source of variation that we study was the major benefit offered by the program: the "socio-economic reintegration package." The package provided a menu of opportunities from which ex-combatants could choose: 1) secondary school or university, 2) a one-year or shorter vocational-training program, or 3) in-kind (non-financial) start up materials to begin "incomegenerating activities." The latter would involve working with one of the reintegration program's implementing partners to devise a business plan, receiving basic training on running a business, and receiving in-kind start-up materials for the new business (cash was not given). Regardless of the program chosen, the total value of benefits was to be 600,000 FBu or less. Program documentation shows that the "income-generating activities" option was by far the most popular among the ex-combatants that were to receive benefits at the time of fieldwork in 2007: out of the just over 13,000 ex-combatants to have received benefits by 2007, 96% chose income-generating activities option, 3.6% chose vocational training, and less than 1% chose to resume formal education (MDRP 2007) . The income-generating activities assistance would often take the form of providing goods (e.g., beer, soda) to sell in a small shop, partial payment for a motorcycle to start a "moto-taxi" business, or agricultural assets (livestock, farm tools) to produce marketable farm goods.
The CNDRR and MDRP delegated the delivery of the socio-economic reintegration package benefits to NGO partners. Early in the program, when the number of beneficiaries was rather small, a large and rather disorganized collection of local NGOs was contracted on an ad hoc basis to deliver benefits. In 2006, anticipating a surge in the number of ex-combatants who would be receiving benefits, the MDRP decided to formalize the system and contracted three large NGOs to deal with the coming wave of ex-combatants. These included Twitezimbere, a Burundian NGO, as well as PADCO and Africare, two international NGOs. The work was divided evenly among the three NGOs. As shown in the left panel of Figure 1 PADCO was assigned to cover ex-combatants registered as residents in the south-west provinces, Twitezimbere was to cover ex-combatants registered as residents in the northern provinces, and Africare was to cover ex-combatants registered as residents in the center provinces. The assignments to the three NGOs were made by the end of the summer in 2006, and programming was to begin as soon as possible. The selection of Africare as one of the three partners was due to pressure by MDRP donors to use international NGOs as implementing partners; the pressure was due to certain procurement restrictions, it seems. This was the case despite the program administrators' and the CNDRR's concerns about the readiness of Africare to implement the program. 14 Indeed, it came to be a major problem: while PADCO and Twitezimbere were able to begin quite quickly, Africare's presence on the ground was barely established by late 2006. 15 This was followed by a contracting dispute between CNDRR and Africare that caused further delays. As a result, designated beneficiaries in the Africare area were denied access to the reintegration package until late 2007. This disruption in program access corresponded to the timing of our fieldwork: PADCO and Twitezimbere had begun reintegration programming by late 2006, whereas the Africare did not commence delivery until August 2007. Our fieldwork was conducted in June/July 2007. Thus, the respondents in our sample from the PADCO/Twitezimbere areas had access to reintegration programming, but those from the Africare areas did not, or at best, were only just beginning to have access. So long as any other differences between sample respondents from Africare areas and other areas can be controlled for, this service disruption provides a source of exogenous variation in program access. This is the cornerstone of our strategy for identifying the effects of the reintegration program.
We have explicitly addressed three threats to the validity of our inferences. First despite the exogenous disruption of programming to Africare communities we still must be concerned about the possibility of selection bias. We avoid self-selection bias because we have a disruption in program access that had nothing to do with either beneficiaries or program managers' choices. Nonetheless, we cannot take this shock to program access as an unproblematic source of quasi-random assign-ment at the individual or community levels. First, there may have been incidental imbalances in the characteristics of ex-combatants in the Africare versus non-Africare regions prior to the disruption to access. Also, there may have been differences in the types of communities in which would-be beneficiaries resided in the Africare and non-Africare regions. To reduce biases from these possible imbalances, we use covariate information to identify individuals in the non-Africare regions that resemble those in the Africare region in terms of their individual characteristics and the communities into which they are reintegrating. As such, we identify an "average effect of the treatment on the controls" (ATC; Angrist and Pischke 2008, 70) . We conduct balance checks on a rather large set of pre-disruption covariates. Table 8 in program effects with a regression on an indicator for residence in the Africare region as well as all fourteen of the covariates used for matching. Including covariates helps to reduce bias due to imperfect matching, while the matching helps ensure that our estimated causal effects are robust to specification choice (Ho et al. 2007) . As discussed in Appendix A , matching achieves remarkably good balance on this large set of covariates.
A second methodological challenge is exposure heterogeneity. The disruption in program access that is the basis of our identification strategy occurred after some ex-combatants in the Africare region had already received a reintegration package during a preliminary phase of the program. Our data do not allow us to identify these individuals, but documentation from the program provides the true rate at which this occurred. Table 3 provides the relevant figures. As of the time of our fieldwork in July 2007, the program disruption affected 53% of designated ex-combatant beneficiaries in the Africare region. If we were to simply measure differences between Africare and non-Africare ex-combatants, we would obtain an attenuated estimate of the disruption effect due to the exposure heterogeneity among Africare-region ex-combatants. To correct for this source of bias, we weight our effect estimate by the inverse of the difference in disruption rates across the To avoid any bias this missingness might cause we conducted multiple imputation as described in Appendix C. For inference, we take covariate and treatment values as fixed and base our inference on presumed sampling variability. On each of the imputation-completed datasets, we use sandwich estimates of coefficient covariances that account for clustering at the commune-level. We consider communes to be the relevant area within which an individual's routine economic interactions is confined. For the quantile regression estimates reported below, we use standard errors from inverted rank-test confidence intervals asymptotically robust to non-iid sampling (Koenker and Hallock 2000) . 16 To combine the estimates from each of the imputation-completed datasets, we used standard formulas based on the properties of mixed normal distributions (known as "Ru-bin's rules"; Rubin 1987; King et al. 2001, 53) . 17
We now present estimates of program effects. We begin with effects on economic reintegration.
As discussed above, these are estimates of programmatic effects in that the reintegration program provided direct assistance to ex-combatants for realizing a productive civilian livelihood. By hypothesis, effects on economic reintegration are a necessary part of the causal chain outlined above, which proposes that a boost to an individual's economic conditions can induce that individual to subscribe more faithfully to the laws and norms that govern civilian society. Our estimates of economic effects provide a basis on which we can judge whether these data provide a good test of this proposition. If we do find strong economic effects, then we are in a good position to assess the claim that political integration follows from a boost to economic well-being. Of course, for well-understood reasons associated with the study of mediated effects, this kind of analysis can only test the plausibility of such a two-step causal process (Green et al. 2010) .
From a policy perspective, it might seem trivial that there should be some effect on livelihoods, but remarkably, as discussed above, past studies in Sierra Leone and Liberia (e.g. Humphreys and Weinstein 2005; Levely 2010 ) raise questions about whether such benefits of reintegration programs exist. If we also find that they do not, then there is a strong case for a serious overhaul of reintegration assistance programs. For example, such findings might strengthen the case that individual-level targeting is ineffective without strong community-level assistance (Muggah 2009 ). If we do find substantial effects, however, then it raises question as to whether conditions in Burundi were different than in Sierra Leone or Liberia, or whether the latter studies generated biased estimates. As we discussed above, there are good reasons to suspect the latter.
We present results for two measures of economic reintegration: (1) monthly income and, as a consequence, poverty incidence; and (2) livelihood, specifically the nature of the occupation that the respondent obtained. We present unadjusted estimates on the raw data and then regression adjusted estimates on the matched data. Having the two side by side helps us to assess the bias reduction as well as potential efficiency gains and losses from the adjustment methods. Our primary estimates of average individual-level effects are the regression-adjusted estimates on the matched data. As discussed in Appendix B, a lower bound treatment effect estimate comes from regressions that do not correct for exposure heterogeneity, and an upper bound coming from regressions that do. We also present graphs that display estimated causal effects for the population of ex-combatants serviced by Africare. These show what would have been the gross impact of the program on the Africare beneficiaries had there been no interruption (that is, the "effect of the treatment on the controls").
Our economic outcome measure is the natural logarithm of monthly personal income (in Burundian Francs, or FBu) reported by the respondent. 18 We used the natural logarithm as a variance stabilizing transformation to reduce estimation sensitivity to outliers. The left panel in Figure 2 shows the income distributions for Africare respondents and the matched controls from the five imputation-completed datasets. The gray blocks in the plots show regions of the income distribution below the $1.25/day poverty line (at purchasing power parity, equivalent to 15,000 FBu/month). The dots for the matched controls are scaled proportional to the weight they receive in the analysis. We see that the Africare distribution is substantially heavier at lower income values (e.g., below 10,000 FBu/month). Indeed, the most striking visual impression is that the matched control income distribution exhibits a "floor" just below 10,000 FBU/month, whereas this floor is not evident for the Africare respondents. The Africare respondents also include a cluster of high earners (centered on 100,000 FBU/month) in an area where the matched control distribution is very thin.
We quantify these differences by examining differences in means, with linear regression, and then differences in quantiles, with quantile regression. The linear regression estimates appear in Table 4 . The results show that in the raw data, Africare respondents' monthly income was about 50% lower on average. On the matched data, before adjusting for exposure heterogeneity, the point estimate for the Africare coefficient very similar as in the raw data (-0.59 versus -0.67), although the p-value (0.26) is quite large for the matched data. The stability of the coefficient estimate suggests there was little confounding to be removed in this case; the inflation of the p-value reflects the rather small sample size in the matched data. When we run a leaner specification that includes only the unit death rate, war violence index, ruling party province, and the propensity score, the estimate does not change much (coefficient of -0.53 with p-value of 0.29). The next estimate in the table adjusts further for exposure heterogeneity, providing our upper bound estimate. The adjustment essentially scales the Africare coefficient by about 1.9. This estimate is suggests that Africare respondent incomes are 70% lower income on average, but with the same large p-value. However, differences in averages often hide important differences between groups' incomes, because income distributions can be very poorly behaved in terms of skew or massing at extreme values even after stabilizing transformations (Koenker and Hallock 2000; Angrist and Pischke 2008, 269-270) . Figure 2 already showed that there appear to be important differences in the income distributions of the Africare respondents and their matched counter-parts. We used quantile regression to estimate more general income effects, including effects on incidence of very low or very high incomes. We estimated differences in income deciles 1 through 9. The estimates are shown in Table 5 . There are large differences in the decile values, and p-values are quite small. Thus, while there is essentially equality of distributions for the first two deciles, from the matched data we estimate that the third decile among program non-recipients in the Africare region is 45% (lower bound) to 68% (upper bound) of what it would have been had there been no interruption.
Interestingly, these differences are decreasing over the deciles. By decile 7, the gap narrows to a difference of 32% (lower bound) to 52% (upper bound). Thus, we find that the income effect is declining in potential income, at least on the log-scale. 19 The quantile effects are easier to understand when they are used to plot cumulative log-income distributions. We do so in the right panel of What is the significance of this income effect relative to the value of the program benefits?
An answer helps to assess the material benefits of the program against the costs. Above, we described that the the value of the benefit was up to 600,000 FBu. From the cumulative logincome distribution plot in Figure 2 , we see that the median earner in the Africare region was earning about 10,000FBu/month. We estimate that this is about 64% (lower bound) to 44% (upper bound) of what that person would have earned had there been no disruption, implying a counterfactual incomes of about 15,500 (lower bound) and 23,000 (upper bound per month. Thus, the full value of the program benefit could not be immediately converted into income. Rather, the income effects 5,500 to 13,000 FBu/month imply that it would take 4 to 9 years to recuperate the value of the 600,000 FBu investment. This recuperation depends on the short-run income differences that we measure being sustained over such a period-something that we cannot assess. Future research should look more closely at the factors that constrain ex-combatants' ability to convert program benefits into income.
To study effects on livelihood, we examine respondents answers to a question about what kind of work they did to sustain themselves. We coded their responses as (1) no occupation, (2) an agricultural occupation, (3) a non-agricultural, skilled sector occupation (including returning to school, professional position, or skilled labor, such as automotive repair, electrical technician, etc.) and (4) a non-agricultural, unskilled sector occupation (including security guard, manual labor, etc.).
The distribution for the Africare respondents and their matched controls are displayed in Figure 3 (the displays average over the five imputation-completed datasets). We see that agricultural occupations dominate, accounting for about 60-70% of responses overall. We see some indication that Africare respondents are more likely to report that they have "no occupation" and less likely to report a "skilled" occupation. Looking more closely at these differences, we found that for "skilled" occupations, the pattern is driven by differences in attainment of skilled labor occupations, rather than returning to school or obtaining a professional position. Indeed, there were no Africare respondents reporting having obtained a skilled labor occupation, whereas the rate among the matched non-Africare respondents ranged from 7% to 9%.
Table 6 answers whether livelihood outcomes of the non-Africare beneficiaries generally improved. In order to measure this, we need to impose some ordering on the livelihood outcomes.
Based on our observations in the field and discussions with Burundians, we felt the following ordering made the most sense: "no occupation" would be the least desirable category in terms of social status and ability to sustain oneself, "agriculture" and "non-agriculture, unskilled" occupations would be at the same middle level of desirability, and "skilled" occupations would be to be the highest. We fit an ordered logistic regression to these outcomes on the raw data and then the matched data, using the same covariate and exposure heterogeneity adjustments as in the above regressions. Using the raw data, that overall Africare respondents have 20% lower odds of being in a higher ranked category than non-Africare respondents. After removing confounding bias through matching and regression adjustment, the difference becomes much larger. Indeed, we estimate that the effect of the reintegration program was such that Africare respondents had between 54% to 77% lower odds of being in a higher ranked income category. The p-value for this difference is 0.065 for a one-tailed test, which is appropriate here since we hypothesize a direction for the effect.
Given the sample size these results provide good evidence of a genuine improvement in livelihoods of the non-Africare group compared to the Africare group.
To what extent do programmatic economic impacts contribute to political reintegration? Can a boost to economic well-being affect orientation toward political order and deepen appreciation of norms that govern civilian society? The empirical analysis thus far shows that the reintegration program substantially boosted the income of ex-combatants whose earnings would otherwise have been low. The conditional income effects resulted in large differences in poverty. These kinds of concentrated effects may be desirable. The logic of opportunity costs suggests that it is precisely these low potential-income ex-combatants who may be most at risk to be drawn back into action against the state or crime. Concentrating benefits among this segment may be the most efficient way to contribute to post-conflict stability.
As described above, we define political reintegration as an ex-combatant accepting that vio-lence is not a legitimate means to seek political or personal gain. Such reintegration should be reflected in attitudinal changes. These include a favorable view of civilian life relative to combatant life and attitudes consistent with norms of peaceful and democratic conflict management. 20 Attitudinal survey questions such as these tend to be quite noisy. Thus, we expect this to be a rather low powered test of political reintegration effects. With those caveats, we consider three attitudinal measures: (1) responses to a question about whether life was better as a combatant; (2) responses to a question of whether one is very satisfied, somewhat satisfied, or unsatisfied with the peace accords, which were ostensibly based on norms of peaceful and democratic political competition; and (3) responses to a question about whether Burundians should allow the government as currently constituted to have a lot of time to sort out the many problems facing Burundian society, or whether Burundians should start thinking about changing the government.
In studying down-stream political reintegration impacts, we actually focus on reduced form relationships between Africare status and these outcomes. This may seem like a strange way to test what is essentially a mediated relationship between a reintegration program and political reintegration, with economic well-being being the mediator. The reasons have to do with what our quasi-experiment allow us to identify. We cannot use Africare status as an instrumental variable for any single economic outcome, because we have already seen that Africare status is associated with substantial differences on multiple dimensions. Recently expounded problems with linear mediation analysis are so profound (Green et al. 2010 ) that we decided to forgo such an analysis. Nonetheless, we think our reduced form estimates provide a useful probe into the plausibility of the claim that economic reintegration contributes to political reintegration. The reintegration program in Burundi was tightly focused on individual-level economic assistance. Thus, we see little reason to doubt that any apparent effects on political reintegration arise through the economic assistance role of the program.
We asked whether respondents thought life is better as a civilian (=1), with the alternative (=0) being that life was either better as a combatant or there was no difference. About 81% of matched controls indicated that life was better as a civilian life, whereas only 71% of Africare respondents indicated as such, implying 43% lower odds for Africare respondents. Thus, the strong tendency overall is to indicate a preference for civilian life, but that tendency is not as strong among respondents in the Africare region. In depth interviews that we conducted with ex-combatants alongside the survey, told of a general sense of "war fatigue." More refined estimates of the program effects are displayed in Table 7 , which presents results from logistic regressions. In the raw data we see that the Africare coefficient is essentially zero.
In the matched data however, we estimate that the odds of stating that civilian life is better are 51% to 74% less among Africare recipients. The p-value of 0.085 for a one-tailed test, which is somewhat large, indicative of imprecisely we have measured the effect. None of the other covariates included in the matched data regressions exhibited a strong relationship to this outcome measure. We estimated a leaner specification, including only the Hutu indicator, and it yielded even more attenuated results (coefficient of -0.58 and p-value of 0.26). Thus, the evidence of effects on attitudes toward civilian versus combatant life is not particularly strong statistically, despite the rather large estimated odds ratios.
Our next outcome variable was based on whether respondents said that they were "very satisfied" with the peace accords (=1) versus "satisfied" or "dissatisfied" (=0). The proportion responding "very satisfied" was 68% for both the matched controls and the Africare respondents. Thus, while there is a reasonable amount of variation on this question, there is no difference in rates across the two groups of respondents. The more refined estimates in Table 7 show as much, where the estimated coefficients are essentially 0. Thus, effects on attitudes toward the peace accords appear to be trivial or non-existent.
Our final attitudinal measure of political reintegration was a question about whether the government should be given more time (=1) to sort out the major problems facing Burundian society, or whether Burundians should consider ways to change the current government (=0). The question interacts with the political context in a number of ways that we should elaborate. First, the outcome of the war was one that brought about a fundamental transformation in opportunities for Hutu mobility, including the ethnic integration of major institutions such as the army, the civil service, and educational systems. At the same time, more radical Hutu parties, including FNL factions, accused the CNDD-FDD of "selling out" far short of achieving an ethnic balance in public institutions reflective of the ethnic balance in society. The ethnic quota in the military, for example, posited a 50-50 ethnic balance, far from the 85-14-1 Hutu-Tutsi-Twa balance typically presumed among Burundians. Among the ex-rebels included in our ex-combatant sample, we presume that expressions of the need to "consider ways to change the current government" would tend to reflect respondents' sympathizing with the FNL's accusations about the CNDD-FDD "selling out." In our data, we find that about 82% of the matched controls indicated that the government "should be given more time", whereas about 90% of the Africare respondents indicated as such, indicating the odds of a pro-government response are about two times higher for Africare respondents. This difference goes in the opposite of the hypothesized direction. The logistic regression estimates in Table 7 show that once we take the covariates into account, we estimate that the odds of indicating the the government should be given more time are two to four times higher, although the p-value is rather large at 0.24. Thus, there is no evidence that the effect of the programming made ex-combatants less likely express impatience with the government.
Our findings suggest that over the rather short duration that we could assess, the reintegration program produced a significant boost to income among ex-combatants who would otherwise have been among the worst off, resulting in a substantial lowering of poverty incidence. The program also improved the livelihood prospects for ex-combatants. We sought to assess whether economic assistance of this form can also translate into political reintegration effects, which we measured as respondents attitudes toward civilian life, the peace accords, and the government. The aim was to test a key proposition underpinning much of current reintegration programming: improvements to economic well-being may induce a more positive disposition toward political order and the laws and norms governing civilian society. We do not find compelling evidence of such downstream effects.
We recognize that there are a number of limitations to our analysis. First, we are evaluating program effects within a very short timeframe. Non-Africare respondents had received their socioeconomic reintegration packages no more than nine months prior to our fieldwork. A longer time frame may have been better but good causal identification for such a study would be extremely unlikely. Indeed, in our case, Africare beneficiaries began to receive reintegration packages shortly after we completed fieldwork, thus erasing the discontinuity that we have exploited for our study.
Second, we relied on a relatively small sample due to the need to remove incidental imbalances for good balance and causal identification. Our matching algorithm discarded over 70% of the non-Africare respondents, and this after we had already discarded Bujumbura-based respondents, who constituted 12% of the original sample. Future research ought to anticipate the need for such balance, and design more efficient sampling strategies (e.g., by sampling on already-measured community-level attributes). Third, our analysis is confined to those registered to receive benefits outside the capital city. In many post-conflict contexts, rather large numbers of ex-combatants congregate in capital cities, raising questions about the external validity of our findings. Nonetheless, in Burundi, the vast majority of ex-combatants settled outside Bujumbura, and so we think our study is well-motivated on those grounds, not to mention the fact that excluding Bujumbura was necessary for good causal identification. Finally, we would have greatly preferred to have had unobtrusive behavioral measures of political reintegration. Our assessment of political reintegration only gets at the self-reported attitudes. Data on criminality and violence behavior would be ideal, if it were available. We were unable to locate sufficiently fine-grained data for these purposes.
Fourth, the discontinuity that we exploited was regional. This forced us to make an assumption that, once we had controlled for individual and community-level attributes, we had achieved exchangeability all the way down to the individual level. This assumption cannot be tested. These limitations aside, we have made progress in important ways. First, the type of discontinuity that we exploit offers the best feasible design for measuring the impact of reintegration programs in their totality. Because these are "emergency" programs in fragile political environments, there is little hope of a reintegration program being randomized fully or even being subject to a randomized roll-out design. 21 In future research we advise seeking these kinds of discontinuities, often due to program failures as well as continuing to seek opportunities to randomize features of reintegration programs-e.g. different combinations of community-level and individual level assistance and different ways of either promoting or discouraging the creation of associations among ex-combatants. These kinds of within-program experiments could allow us to assess causal mechanisms and policy options. Second, while the regional nature of our discontinuity forced us to make assumptions about exchangeability across regions, it also allowed us to ensure that broader equilibrium effects were incorporated into our estimates of program effects. Income, occupation, and political attitudes are all likely to exhibit substantial local spill-over. If we had attempted to identify causal effects by comparing individuals within the same locality, these spill-overs would have been hidden. Finally, our adjustment strategy resembles the long line of labor economics research on the United States National Supported Work program (Dehejia and Wahba 1999; Smith and Todd 2005) . Smith and Todd (2005) have shown that program effect estimates are quite sensitive to the covariate set that one chooses. This does not seem to be such an important problem in our case since the differences in the estimates on the raw and matched data are small in almost all cases. We have used a very rich covariate set that, unlike other studies, accounts for both individual characteristics and community characteristics. This is crucial, as economic and political reintegration outcomes are most certainly the result of an interaction between these two levels.
Ex-combatant reintegration programming is central in most transitions from civil war to peace.
Considerable sums are expended on such programs worldwide. Peace researchers and program managers attribute great importance to such programs in helping societies move past critical barriers to sustainable peace. These programs provide incentives that ostensibly lure ex-combatants away from the use of violence to meet their material and psychological needs, and re-orient them toward subscribing to norms that govern civilian society. But the evidence on the impact of these programs is very thin. There is a worrying gap between effort, expectations, and evidence.
We make a major contribution in the way of evidence. We use a disruption in the implementation of the ex-combatant reintegration program in Burundi as a source of exogenous variation to measure the impact of the program. The disruption occurred when one of the implementing partners fell into dispute with the government for reasons quite independent of the characteristics of the ex-combatants that were due to be served. This groups of intended beneficiaries included approximately one-third of the overall ex-combatant beneficiary population. Because of the dispute, this large group of would-be beneficiaries had their benefits withheld for nearly a year. During that time, we were able to launch a field study to measure effects of reintegration programming.
We studied effects on both the proximate economic outcomes that were directly targeted ("pro-grammatic effects"), as well as second-order effects on political attitudes that were expected to follow from a boost to economic well-being ("downstream effects"). To achieve good causal identification, we matched ex-combatants whose benefits were withheld to those that suffered no such disruption on a rich set of individual-level and community-level characteristics. We used regression adjustment to correct for the fact that the matches were not exact. We also used an inverse propensity adjustment to make up for the fact that a minority segment of ex-combatants in the region suffering the disruption had been able to access program benefits prior to the disruption. Our assessment of "programmatic" effects is important, because past research has raised questions about whether even these proximate impacts exist. We find that they do. The program affected a substantial boost to the income of those who would otherwise have been among the worst off, leading to a large reduction in poverty incidence. In addition, livelihood outcomes improved. We do not find compelling evidence for downstream effects on political reintegration, at least as measured through attitudes. While we found a moderate effect on ex-combatants' sense that civilian life was preferable to combatant life, there was no effect of either increasing levels of satisfaction with the peace accords or increasing levels of support for current governing institutions, raising questions about a possible positive link between a boost to economic well-being and a more positive orientation toward stability and norms governing civilian society.
We hope that our analysis provides an example of a research design that successfully exploits unusual programmatic discontinuities to estimate important causal effects. Sometimes these discontinuities happen by design, as when programs are rolled out in a random fashion. Sometimes the discontinuities happen by accident, as in the program we study in this article. We suspect that bureaucratic failures, halts to service delivery, and other such unanticipated sources of variation in program performance are quite common and that they would provide excellent opportunities to measure program effects, particularly if the disruptions are long in duration and we encourage fellow researchers to seek such sources of exogenous variation in future research.
Age We hypothesize that younger ex-combatants will be less well endowed with pre-existing skills and social networks that are necessary for successful economic reintegration. Previous studies (Blattman and Annan 2009) have shown that child soldiers in particular are deprived of the crucial period of their lives when important human and social capital skills are developed. Thus our expectation is that younger ex-combatants may experience less economic reintegration than older ex-combatants.
Hutu We expect differences in the earning potential for those identifying as Hutu versus Tutsi (there are no Twa in this sample). The vast majority of those participating in the rebellion were Hutu. The small number of Tutsi that participated in the rebellion are likely those whose relations to their communities were somehow strained. For those reasons, we expect Tutsi ex-rebels to fair worse economically than their Hutu counterparts.
An ex-combatant coming from a pre-war farming household was probably relatively poor compared to those ex-combatants whose parents had more lucrative non-agricultural jobs. Coming from a non-farming household is also likely to affect an excombatant's ability to find an occupation outside of farming.
Years of Education, Pre-War Ex-combatants with more education should have an easier time finding a productive livelihood and reintegrating.
Prewar Household Wealth Index Because ex-combatants with greater wealth before the war should, we presume, have higher incomes after the war we include a scale that captures the value of an ex-combatant's pre-war household assets. We created the scale based on survey respondents' answers to three questions about their pre-war household: did their beds have sheets, did they own a radio, and did they own any cattle. The bed-sheets and radio measures were devised after focus groups discussions in Burundi, in which these assets were deemed clear markers of a household having moved beyond basic subsistence in their consumption level.
Ownership of cows is a distinct indicator of wealth in Burundian society. We fit a twoparameter logistic graded response model on these responses, using the "ltm" package in R (Rizopoulous 2006). We then generated a pre-war wealth index using factor scores from this model, estimated with the imputation method described in Rizopoulos and Moustaki (2008) . 22 We fit the model on a pooled dataset that included the ex-rebels and civilians from the same regions as the ex-rebels. We assume that the factor loadings are common across the two groups; including the civilians greatly improves the precision of the fit.
Out-going Rank Outgoing rank is likely to indicate the ability of the individual. In addition, outgoing rank determined the monthly reinsertion benefit level, as discussed in the main text.
We use two binary variables to indicate whether the subject's exiting rank was commissioned officer or non-commissioned officer, with rank-and-file as a baseline category.
Unit Death Rate We were concerned that ex-combatants who experienced the most mortal combat would be more psychologically traumatized and therefore might find it more difficult to return to normal economic activity. Thus we include the rate of death within subject's units as reported by the subjects.
We hypothesize that ex-combatants who were in combat longer would find it more difficult to reintegrate into society. In Uganda, Blattman and Annan (2009) found that time in the LRA faction was associated with poorer economic reintegration. Their explanation was that time in the faction robbed individuals of the time needed to develop economically useful capabilities and networks.
Family Death Rate With this covariate we capture exposure to violence in terms of proportion of family members killed in the war. Our concern was, again, that more exposure to violence would make economic reintegration more difficult.Furthermore postwar economic opportunities are often supplied by social networks like the family. Ex-combatants with a large percentage of family members killed would, we speculate, have fewer contacts with which 22 We also asked respondents about whether they owned land before the war, but we did not include it in the scale because there was too little variation in the variable (about 95% of respondents indicated that they possessed land prior to the war). A Mokken analysis of these three indicators showed that they loaded monotonically and contributed a moderately strong, single dimension signal (the lowest H score was 0.38; see van der Ark (2007) ). We used ANOVA tests to determine whether a one, two, or even higher order logistic model fit the data best, and found that the two parameter model was optimal.
to pursue employment.
While several rebel factions fought in the war the CNDD-FDD came out the clear winner of the conflict. As such CNDD-FDD members may have better access to economic opportunities than members of other factions, like the CNDD-Nyangoma, FROLINA, or FNL. Therefore, we expect CNDD-FDD members to have a more successful economic reintegration experience than non-CNDD-FDD members. In addition, the factions differed in their levels of internal discipline. FROLINA and FNL were associated with more abusive tactics, and so control for this faction helps address Humphreys and Weinstein's (2007) finding that more abusive factions have more problems with social acceptance.
Demobilization Date Ex-combatants who demobilized earlier had a longer period to reintegrate than did those who demobilized later so we expect ex-combatants who demobilized later to have less success in economic reintegration. We use the number of months that elapsed from the start of demobilization to the time of the subject's demobilization, standardizing the variable to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1 to improve numerical stability.
Propensity Score In order to insure overall balance of our covariates we also matched on the propensity score. We estimated the propensity score using a logistic regression of Africare region status on all of the covariates (including the community characteristics mentioned below). The specification did not include any interactions or higher order terms.
Accumulated War Violence, 1993 Violence, -2004 We hypothesize that communities that were exposed to more violence may have suffered capital destruction that dampens economic opportunities.
The accumulated war violence for each commune is the sum of Gaussian-kernel distances between the commune's geographic centroid and each of the major conflict events listed in the Armed Conflict Location and Event Database (ACLED, Version 1), produced by the Peace Research Institute of Oslo. 23 We use the sum of kernel distances, rather than simple counts, to account for the fact that the ACLED data likely under-reports the number of violent war events, and that such events tend to occur in geographic clusters that spill over commune boundaries.
Population density is closely associated with the economic vibrancy of a commune. More densely populated communes will have larger markets for products and labor. We use the natural log to account for extreme skew in the distribution. 24 Ruling-Party-controlled Province Provinces with governors affiliated with the ruling CNDD-FDD party would likely be more successful in attracting government-controlled funds for reconstruction, which is an economic stimulant. We assign a dummy variable for whether the subject's commune is located in a province with a CNDD-FDD governor.
Bujumbura Bujumbura is the capital city and, given its enormous size and density relative to the rest of the country, it is clearly a case apart in terms of potential economic outcomes.
Because the Africare region is outside Bujumbura, we simply exclude ex-combatants from Bujumbura entirely from the analysis. Thus, the inferences we make below refer are based only on ex-combatants residing outside Bujumbura.
We find moderate to poor balance in the pre-matched covariates, as would be expected. Nonetheless, we have more than double the number of non-Africare recipients to Africare recipients. This creates the opportunity to construct a matched set of non-Africare respondents to use as a pseudo control group. To do this, we use a matching algorithm, GenMatch (Sekhon n.d.; Diamond and Sekhon 2005) , to match Africare and non-Africare ex-combatants on fourteen covariates likely to be prognostic of economic and political outcomes.
Balance statistics for the five imputation-completed datasets are presented in Table 8 . We used matching with replacement, and multiple Africare respondents were matched to common non-Africare respondents in a number of cases. This is evident from the sample sizes reported in the first column of the table. We see that out of the 261 candidate subjects in the non-Africare region, between 63 and 75 were selected as "controls" across the five datasets. In that way, the matching algorithm was quite selective, relegating nearly 200 of the non-Africare region subjects as being too distant from the Africare subjects to be useful for comparison. As recommended in Ho et al. (2009, 16) , we ensure that each of the matched non-Africare observations has the appropriate influence on our analysis by weighting each of them proportionally to the number of times each is used as a match. 25 The balance checks incorporate these weights. We also use these weights in our estimation of program effects.
Some of the covariates are well-balanced even without matching. This was the case for age, Hutu, prewar education, non-commissioned officer, demobilization date, and ruling party province.
We nonetheless match on them to insure that they remain in balance even after matching on the other covariates that were not naturally in balance. The fact that several variables were balanced before matching has implications for how we interpret the balance statistics after matching. Ho et al. recommend looking at improvement in balance rather than p-scores on tand KS tests. Their rationale is that many observations are dropped as a result of matching procedures and so p-scores can improve simply by virtue of the standard errors increasing as the sample size gets smaller. Imai et al. (2008) recommend, wisely we think, that the researcher also make sure that balance is actually improving-means are getting closer together and observations are getting closer to the 45 degree line in the QQ plots. We agree with their argument but hasten to point out that it is not necessarily cause for concern that some covariates' balance worsens as we attempt to achieve balance on other covariates so long the resulting dataset does not exhibit imbalance particularly in the cases where covariates were well-balanced before we matched. For this reason, we do not find the occasional losses in balance on certain covariates (e.g. on age, Hutu, or education) to be reason for concern. In addition, even though t-test and Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) p-values do not appropriately reflect certainty about equality of distributions, they remain useful as standardized 25 The precise weight is k i Nc ∑ i ki , where k i is the number of times that i is matched and N c is the number of control observations. The normalizing constant, Nc ∑ i ki , simply ensures that the weights sum to the number of controls in the sample and does not affect the analysis. These are the weights produced by default in the R package, MatchIt (Ho et al, 2009) , which we used to implement GenMatch. measures of imbalance (Diamond and Sekhon 2005, 11) .
The statistics in Table 8 show that we achieved very good balance after matching, even with this large set of covariates. The t-tests on difference of means indicate that the distribution of our treated and control cases have very similar means, with only log(population density) exhibiting somewhat low p-values (e.g. below .20). We inspected density plots for this variable in the matched data, and found that the Africare respondent communities exhibited bimodality on this variable, while the non-Africare respondent communities were more uniformly distributed. Thus, the imbalance was mostly on interior values. This is not of major concern, because regression adjustment tends not to be very model-dependent when imbalance occurs over interior regions (that is, within the convex hull) of the data (King and Zeng 2006) .
The Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) tests provide a measure of balance on higher order features of covariate distributions. The tests show that we achieve excellent balance for about half of the ten variables where the KS test was appropriate. Among those with rather low p-values, we find that the t-test p-values tend to be large, and the ratios of treated and control variances tend to be reasonably close to one over the imputation-completed datasets. Thus, we have balance on at least the first two moments. One variable, the wartime violence index, tends to exhibit rather high treated/control variance ratios. We inspected density plots for this variable in the matched data.
We found that the problems are attributable to a small mass of 8 Africare respondents with values located just above the maximum of the non-Africare respondent values. This means that we have to accept some degree of extrapolation in this range.
Our estimation strategy is to specify a regression model that uses a linear specification for all covariates. Regression on the matched data provides counter-factual values at precisely the covariate locations of the Africare observations, helping to overcome the fact that we cannot match exactly on all covariates (Rubin and Thomas 2000) . The balance that we have achieved on the covariates substantially reduces the importance of our choice of a linear model. The covariance adjustment also makes the analysis more efficient to the extent that the covariates are prognostic.
Such efficiency is important in our case because we have a small sample size.
As mentioned in the main text some programming had begun before the disruption in access that is our exgenous source of variation. Some of our treated (Africare) cases were exposed to a different treatment because of this earlier programming. To correct for this exposure heterogeneity we weighted our data acording to the following model:
where y * i is a latent outcome variable, t i ∈ {0, 1} is an endogenous indicator of exposure to the disruption, z i ∈ {0, 1} and x ′ i ∈ R k are exogenous variables in that E (ϵ i |(z i , x i )) = 0, and β 2 is a k × 1 vector. For the data considered here, the z i = 1 refers to being in the Africare region, and z i = 0 refers to being in the non-Africare region. The t i = 1 refers to one's access to the program having been disrupted, t i = 0 means access was not disrupted. The coefficient β 1 is our estimate of the program disruption effect. The coefficient ϕ measures the expected difference in the ex post probability of disruption for those with z i = 1 relative to those with z i = 0. The fact that t i and z i are binary variables does not affect our interpretation at all (see Angrist and Pischke 2008, Ch. 4). We use a latent variable, y * , for generality to generalized linear models that can be expressed in terms of latent variables (e.g. all binary, ordered, or multinomial probit/logit models; see Long, 1997) . The transformations discussed in this section would then apply to differences on the latent variable rather than the observed response. When we are working with a linear model, then y * simply equals the observed response.
We make the following exclusion restriction assumptions:
If A.1 and A.2 are true, then substituting the right-hand side of the expression for t i into the right-hand side of the expression for y * i , we can write the the expression for y * i as follows:
the disruption had only recently done so at the time of fieldwork. Considering them to have been subject to the disruption has, at worst, an effect of biasing our effect estimate toward zero. Thus, to be clear, we are measuring the effects of disrupted access to a functioning reintegration program.
By disregarding these rates of program take-up, we actually take a more conservative approach, in that we do not attempt to make the program look more effective by netting out any dilution due to non-engagement by certain beneficiaries despite their having had access.
The above results are based on a homogenous effects model. If we loosen that assumption to allow for variable coefficients, then we could interpret our estimate of β 1 as the effect of the program only on those whose access to the program would depend on z i (see Angrist and Pischke 2009, Theorem 4.4.1). It seems to us that the estimate under the homogenous effects assumption is probably higher than the true average effect of the program. This is because people who obtained access to the program in the Africare region are likely to have been more organized generally about their personal affairs; therefore, we suspect for them, the program's benefits would be less. For these reasons, we believe that the scaled estimates are likely to be an upper bound on the true average effect. Reduced form estimates-that, is estimates from regressions using the unadjusted z i rather than ϕz i -are a lower bound. We report both below.
interview. With the observations limited to former rebel males registered to receive reintegration assistance outside Bujumbura, the dataset includes 110 ex-rebels registered in the Africare region and 261 outside the Africare region.
As is common in large scale surveys such as this, the data exhibit occasional missingness on items. Such missingness is due to "don't know" responses, enumerator error, or data-entry error.
In the subset of data that we used, only once did the item missingness rate reach 10% for any given variable (the death rate of the ex-combatant's fighting unit). Otherwise the rates of item missingness were usually 0, but occasionally around 1-2%. Listwise deletion would nonetheless have implied discarding 23% of excombatant observations. To avoid the inefficiencies and biases associated with listwise deletion, we used multiple imputation to fill missing values. 30 Multiple imputation was conducted using the "mice" package in R (van Buuren and Groothuis-Oudshoorn 2010). Predictive mean matching imputation was used for all numeric, binary, and ordered categorical variables; multinomial logit regression imputation was used for non-ordered categorical variables. Predictive mean matching is attractive because, when the item-level data exhibit only low levels of missingness, it is robust to a wide range of misspecifications of the imputation model (Little and Rubin, 2002:69) . Uncertainty in predictive mean matching arises in the fit of the predictive mean model. With the multinomial logit, uncertainty arises from the fit of the model and the fundamental uncertainty inherent in the outcome being modeled as a random draw from a multinomial distribution. To account for these imputation uncertainties, multiple imputed datasets should be generated (hence "multiple" imputation). The analysis should then be run on each of the datasets, and averaged using the appropriate averaging forumlas. This was the approach that we took, working with five imputed datasets. 31 Summary statistics for the five imputation-completed samples are presented in Table 8 . 30 In additional to the loss in statistical power, listwise deletion can bias results by either discarding cases based on the value of the dependent variable or distorting the relationship between the sample and population in ways that bias approximations (e.g. linear or quadratic) of unknown functional forms. This is explained in Samii (2010) . If multiple imputation is done in a reasonable manner, it will be considerably less biased and will generate appropriate uncertainty estimates. See King et al. (2001) for some general discussion of multiple imputation methods, and Rubin (1987) and Little and Rubin (2002) for deeper treatments. Approximation bias is best understood through the lens of non-random sampling. See, e.g., Korn and Graubard (1999, 159-185) . 31 As Rubin (1987, 114) explains, rather few imputations are typically needed to achieve reliable estimates.
Tables Figure 1: Subject locations Raw data Bujumbura Gitega Matched data Bujumbura Gitega The gray region in the maps is Africare's domain of responsibility for the reintegration program. The boundaries shown on the maps are commune boundaries. The left map shows the locations of subjects in the raw data. The right map shows the locations of subjects in the matched data. The radii of the non-Africare points are proportional to the weight these subjects receive in the analysis. Observations from all five of the imputation-completed datasets are shown together in the maps. Income (FBu/mo) Africare Matched controls
(None) 1000 10000 100000 Imp. 1 Imp. 2 Imp. 3 Imp. 4 Imp. 5 Imp. 1 Imp. 2 Imp. 3 Imp. 4 Imp. 5 Income (FBu/mo) Percentile (None) 1000 10000 100000 0th 10th 20th 30th 40th 50th 60th 70th 80th 90th 100th Actual Africare Model-estimated Africare Counterfactual lower bnd. Counterfactual upper bnd.
The size of the points for the matched controls is proportional to the weight assigned to that observation after matching. The figure on the right shows the cumulative log-income distribution for Africare respondents, and then predicted counter-factual distributions. The gray zone corresponds to points below the 15000FBu/month ($1.25/day at PPP) poverty line.
* Not a party to the peace process until September 2008.
Sources:MDRP (2007)
, Nindorera(2007)
, WorldBank (2009)
.
* Approximately 9,000 out of an initial 14,000 demobilized in a first phase (prior to 2004) were from the rebel groups. Of the remaining approximately 9,000 that were demobilized (to generate the 23,185 total), personal communications from program staff suggest that about 5,000 of them were from the rebel groups, although this has not been documented to our knowledge. * * This figure is based on the demobilization targets in World Bank (2009), which were estimated some time after June 2007. There has been some controversy as to whether this overstated the number of "true" FNL-PALIPEHUTU fighters that remained into 2008-9 by a few thousand. Without any other evidence, this is our best estimate, but it may be biased slightly upward.
Sources: World Bank and Multi-country Demobilization and Reintegration Program (MDRP), QuarterlyReports, October-December 2006 and April-June 2007, and Africare Annual Report, 2008
. Africare provinces include Cankuzo, Gitega, Karuzi, Muramvya, Mwaro, and Ruyigi. The table refers only to ex-combatants who are (1) male, constituting 97.5% of ex-combatants in the reintegration program, and (2) registered to receive program benefits outside Bujumbura.
Standard errors computed with clustering at commune level. Regressions on matched data include the covariates in Table4
. The coefficients on these covariates are not displayed to save space. "OR" refers to odds ratio.
The Uppsala Peace Agreement dataset is available online at http://www.pcr.uu.se/research/UCDP/.
DiNardo and Lee (2010) discuss conditions under which matching can even exacerbate self-selection bias.
McMullin (2004) suggests that the problem of postwar reintegration is not so much that ex-combatants have human and social capital deficiencies, but rather that the local economies they reintegrate into have very few economic opportunities available for them.
The youngest ex-rebel in our sample is 19, and the years of recruitment for our respondents was between 1993 and 2003.
Communes are the second-tier administrative units in Burundi, after provinces. A commune is a collection of villages and communities similar to a "county" in the western world. If we exclude the dense urban capital of Bujumbura, communes range in size from 15,000 to 100,000 individuals (or about 3,000 to 20,000 households).
Interview with Marcelo Fabre, MDRP, February 2009.
Geenen (2007) notes that Africare had no presence on the ground in the area of her fieldwork, Ruyigi, in November-December 2006, and that they expressed concerns themselves about whether they could implement the program.
Bootstrapped confidence intervals are inappropriate on the matched sample (Abadie and Imbens 2008) .
The programs used to generate the results reported here are available at http://www...[WEB ADDRESS TO BE INSERTED].
We added one FBu to all values to accommodate reported incomes of zero. To check for sensitivity associated with adding one, we also fit a Tobit regression on log of income with zero-income observations treated as censored; results were identical and so we do not display them.
One reason for this pattern could be a statistical artifact: if the income effect was, for the most part, a simple linear shift, then it would appear as a declining percentage shift after the log transformation. Running the same linear regressions on the raw (not log-transformed) income measure, we estimate that Africare respondent incomes were between 7050 (lower bound) to 13,300 (upper bound) FBu/month lower on average, although the p-value again is high at 0.17. Another explanation may be that the pattern is a genuine reflection of diminishing returns of the program over potential incomes. The data do not allow us to distinguish between these two stories.
Reintegration should also be reflected in conduct-e.g., in refraining from participation in political violence or using threats for personal gain. Unfortunately, our study did not acquire such behavioral measures, and so we can only examine effects on the expressed political attitudes.
This is based on our own field experiences as well as discussions with many World Bank and United Nations program admistrators.
The dataset is available at http://www.prio.no/CSCW/Datasets/
Extreme skewness and other departures from ellisoidal distributions make it difficult for any matching algorithm to ensure that improvement in the balance over any single covariate does not introduce serious imbalance over other covariates (Rubin 1976; Diamond and Sekhon 2005) . We also think the log-transformed value is better for characterizing the distance between subjects.
Details on the survey are available at www....[WEBSITE TO BE INSERTED]
The covariate adjustment that we perform below will reduce any biases associated with those factors. With such a low non-response rate, it is reasonable to believe that any residual bias is negligible.