CHAPTER 1: HOW DOES A RURAL POVERTY ALLEVIATION PROGRAM AFFECT PARENTS' EXPECTATIONS ABOUT THEIR CHILDREN? EVIDENCE FROM BRAC-TUP IN BANGLADESH INTRODUCTION
METHODOLOGY
RESULTS
Transition between expectations
Are the changes in expectations linked to educational outcomes?
MECHANISMS
Wealth effects
Substitution effect
Changes in the valuation of education:
ROBUSTNESS
CONCLUSIONS
Other
INTRODUCTION
DATA AND METHODOLOGY
Data
Area of Analysis:
Selection of treatment and control (donor) groups:
EMPIRICAL STRATEGY
REGIONAL ANALYSIS
Which municipalities should have the largest effects?
RESULTS
Descriptive statistics:
Aggregated estimations:
Analysis of heterogeneity:
Panel estimations:
Additional estimations:
CONCLUSIONS
TABLES AND FIGURES
CHAPTER 3: CHANGES IN RANKINGS AND COLLEGE PERFORMANCE: EVIDENCE FROM COLOMBIA INTRODUCTION
METHODOLOGY
Value-added functions
Regression discontinuity design
Results for changes in rankings
Competitive vs non-competitive cohorts
Results for receiving an academic probation
CONCLUSIONS
Academic probation does not provide valuable information to students to improve their
Figure 1
Figure 1 . 1 :
Figure 1
Figure 1 . 3 :
Figure 1
Figure 1 . 5 :
Figure 1 . 6 :
Figure 1 . 7 :
Relação
Figure 2 .
Figure 2 . 1 :Figure 2 . 3 :
Figure
Figure 2 .
Figure 3 . 1 :
Figure 3 . 2 :Figure 3 . 3 :
Figure 3 . 4 :
Figure B. 2 :
Figure
Figure B. 5 :
Figure B. 5 (
Figure C. 2 :
Table 1 . 2 :
Table 1 . 3 :
Table 1 . 4 :
Table 1 . 5 :
Table 1 . 6 :
Table 1 . 7 :
Table 1 . 8 :
Table 2 . 1 :
Table 2 .
Table 2 . 3 :
Table 2 . 4 :
Table 2 . 5 :
Table 2 . 6 :
Table 2 . 7 :
Table 2 . 8 :
Table 3 . 2 :
to express my sincere gratitude to my exceptional advisor, Mary Arends-Kuenning, for her invaluable support and guidance throughout my doctoral studies. She encouraged me to pursue research questions that I had almost abandoned, made excellent bibliographical recommendations, and was always attentive to listen to my ideas and concerns, providing constructive and insightful recommendations. Angela Lyons opened a door to explore topics related to the welfare of refugee populations I was not familiar with, and this opportunity helped me to improve my skills as a scholar. I thank her for her continuous support, encouragement, and for always caring about my wellbeing. Catalina Herrera and Marcelo Medeiros, your feedback was key to make huge improvements to my dissertation. I am also grateful to the amazing people I met during my doctoral studies. Thiago, Josephine, Yifang, and Aiman, I enjoyed working with you on different projects and I expect we can continue working together. Paavani, Noe, Protensia, Joana, Reajul, Rocío & Ivan, Edward, and many other students, professors, and staff from ACE, you made my stay in Champaign a great experience and enriched my work through discussions and feedback provided during the department seminars. To Fulbright Colombia for the generous funding for my doctoral studies. Finally, I will be always grateful to my family and my wife Britt, whom I met in the PhD program and accompanied me from the beginning of this journey. vi TABLE OF CONTENTS CHAPTER 1: HOW DOES A RURAL POVERTY ALLEVIATION PROGRAM AFFECT PARENTS' EXPECTATIONS ABOUT THEIR CHILDREN? EVIDENCE FROM BRAC-TUP IN BANGLADESH ........................................................................................1 CHAPTER 2: DOES THE SOYBEAN EXPANSION IN BRAZIL INCREASE FORMAL JOBS? ...........................................................................................................................53 CHAPTER 3: CHANGES IN RANKINGS AND COLLEGE PERFORMANCE: EVIDENCE FROM COLOMBIA ...............................................................................................107 APPENDIX A ..............................................................................................................................148 APPENDIX B ..............................................................................................................................153 APPENDIX C ..............................................................................................................................165
Figure 1.6, panel A compares changes in the Political Awareness Index for the ultra-poor
Figure 1.1: Expectations by wealth group, gender, and age
Figure 1.2: a) Effects of the intervention -Binomial outcome
Figure 1.3: Difference between the transition Matrices for the treatment and control group (by time and gender)
Figure 1.4: a) Effects of the intervention on the probability of hiring a private tutor by the type of expectation at the baseline
Figure 1.5: Mechanisms -Effects of the intervention by the level of wealth using the poverty trap cutoff estimated by Balboni et al. (2022) (differential effects between households above vs.below the poverty cutoff in the first follow-up)
Figure 1.6: Effects of the intervention on other variables covered in the coaching and life-skills trainings A B
Figure 1.7: Spillover effects -Effects of the intervention for non-eligible poor households
control. This requirement forces us to exclude from the sample large and well-established producing municipalities that started growing soybeans in the early 1990s and that are some of the major producers in Brazil such as Barreiras or Luis Eduardo Magalhaes (both in the state of Bahia), as there are not enough pre-intervention data periods. Thus, this research focuses on the municipalities labelled as the agricultural frontier (those located in the states of Piauí and, Maranhão in the Northwest; Amapá, Pará, Rondônia, Roraima, and Tocantins in the North; and some municipalities in the states of Mato Grosso and Goiás). Second, our empirical strategy restricts the outcome variables to those with long pre-intervention data. For this research, the only outcome that satisfies this requirement is formal employment. Information about educational outcomes, such as results on standardized tests or school enrollment are not available for the municipalities in Brazil in the early 2000s. Similarly, census data cannot be used as it is only available for two cross sections: 2000 and 2010. Third, we only have access to formal jobs, despite the high levels of informality in the region of analysis. Nevertheless, we believe that access to formal employment is an important indicator of the labor market in Brazil.
Anual de Informações Sociais (RAIS) from the Ministry of Economics of Brazil. Most of the information at the municipal level comes from the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE), the Institute of Applied Economy Research (IPEA), and the Department of the Unified Health System Database (DATASUS), all available online. We complement this information with raster maps for rainfall data from the Climate Hazards Center from the University of California in Santa Barbara (CHIRPS), land flatness from the Geological Service of Brazil (CPMR), and pasture areas from MapBiomas 6.0 collection.
Figure 2.5 shows the local Moran I estimations for the increases in formal jobs per 1,000
machinery per capita (8): Porto dos Gaúchos (MT), Formosa do Rio Preto (BA), São Félix do Araguaia (MT), São José do Xingu (MT) Ribeirão Cascalheira (MT), Peixe (TO), Figueirópolis (TO), Vila Bela da Santíssima Trindade (MT). Machinery comes from the Brazilian Agricultural Census in 2017, whereas investments are calculated as the average values between 2015 to 2018. ii) Highest production of soybeans (7): Porto dos Gaúchos (MT), Formosa do Rio Preto (BA), São Félix do Araguaia (MT), Paragominas (PA), São José do Xingu (MT), Ribeirão Cascalheira (MT), Dom Eliseu (PA). The production is measured as the average between 2017 and 2018. iii) Highest percentages of formal jobs in agriculture (6): Porto dos Gaúchos (MT), Ulianópolis (PA), São José do Xingu (MT), São Félix do Araguaia (MT), Vila Bela da Santíssima Trindade (MT), Figueirópolis (TO). Formal Jobs are measured using the 2010 Brazilian Census, the last one available. iv) Intersection of i) to iii) (4): Porto dos Gaúchos (MT), São José do Xingu (MT), São Félix do Araguaia (MT), Vila Bela da Santíssima Trindade (MT).
Figure 2.1: Area of analysis
Figure 2.4: Effects of the expansion on crop diversity a) b)
Figure 2.5 (cont.): Local Moran I analysis (LISA) for growth in jobs per 1000 inhabitants between 2017/2016 and 2001/2000 e) Services f) Population (Growth 2010 vs 2000)
Figure 3.1: Number of observations using high-school and college rankings
Figure 3.2: Coefficients of high-school rankings for different levels of performance in the first semester of college a) GPA b) Credits earned
Figure 3.4: RD results for receiving an academic probation in the first semester on the probability of obtaining another academic probation in any other semester
Figure B.2: Municipalities with the highest expected effects
Figure B.2 (cont.): Municipalities with the highest expected effects c) Size of the formal agricultural sector
Figure B.5: I. Autocorrelation function graphs for the pre-treatment periods using ASC (Ben-Michael et al., 2021) a) Jobs Agriculture b) Jobs agriculture (w/o soy)
Figure B.5 (cont.): II. Autocorrelation function graphs for the pre-treatment periods using GSC (Xu, 2017) a) Jobs Agriculture b) Jobs agriculture (w/o soy)
Figure C.2: Comparison between competitive and non-competitive cohorts with the rest of the cohorts. Competitiveness defined only in terms of Saber 11 and college entrance exams (excl. GPA) a) GPA b) Credits earned
Descriptive statistics at the baseline (Ultra-Poor) from treated vs control villages
Effects of the intervention on participants' perceptions
Changes in Livestock activities and other activities
Construction of the health awareness index
Robustness Check -Results on expectations using a binomial choice and changing the estimation model
Robustness Check -Results on other variables addressed in the coaching/life skills training
Robustness Check -Results on other the probability of hiring a private tutorThe confidence intervals are estimated using a T distribution with 400 observations, which provides a lower bound, as the sample cells are usually larger than this value. Sant'Anna and Zhao (2020) use a normal approximation to construct the confidence intervals. The estimations use the age groups 6 to 15.
Comparison between the municipalities in the treatment group and other municipalities within the same regions of influence by level of hierarchy and whether they are soybean producers (Increases in jobs per 1000 inhabitants)
2.Descriptive statistics for the treatment and control groups
Average effects of the expansion for the post-treatment period
Analysis of heterogeneity -estimations using synthetic control matching for subgroups of the treatment group
Estimations for jobs per thousand inhabitants using FE panel
Average effects of the expansion for the post-treatment period (number of jobs as the dependent variable, using population as a covariate)
Average effects (post-treatment period) for agricultural jobs by cohort : This table shows the average effects for the post-treatment period. The column P-Value tests the null hypothesis that ATT = 0. Confidence intervals (Lower and Upper bounds) are calculated at the 95% confidence level. Group iv) denotes the municipalities that had on average the largest investments per capita, largest production of soybeans, and larger size of the agricultural formal sector.
Descriptive statistics for the treatment group and donor set for the control group using the weights for agricultural jobs obtained with ASC
Comparison between students classified as having high versus low high-school rankings for two levels of college performance (low and high)
characterized by significant income inequalities and a large informal sector, we seek to contribute to the literature about the socioeconomic effects attributed to this expansion. Finally, the third chapter analyzes students' ranking and their effects on different indicators that measure academic performance in a large public university in Colombia. Like the first chapter, the analysis is centered on the labor supply and introduces some elements from psychology. The chosen university is of particular importance, as it allows low-income students to have access to quality education at negligible costs. It also faces inefficiencies, as it has high rates of expulsion and students remain enrolled for longer than expected without receiving a diploma, which affects their transition to the labor market. The next paragraphs provide a detailed summary of each chapter.
The first chapter analyzes the unintended effects of a randomized control trial in Bangladesh that targets the ultra-poor on the expectations that parents have about their children's occupations. Because significant aspirational gaps exist between poor and wealthy households, as well as between boys and girls, this chapter analyzes whether a graduation-type program can reduce these gaps. As the intervention is a composite of different services including the transfer of a productive asset, training, coaching, and a monthly stipend, among others, this research explores some of the potential channels that could explain changes in expectations, namely substitution and wealth effects, and changes in the perception of education. Further, it analyzes whether higher expectations are linked to better educational outcomes. The results show that the intervention only seems to reduce the aspirational gaps for boys, whereas for girls the intervention could be reinforcing traditional gender roles. The results also point to the importance of the coaching component in these types of interventions.
The second chapter explores causal effects of the soybean expansion in Brazil on formal jobs. Recent literature shows ambiguous socioeconomic effects of the expansion of soybean in Brazil. However, these studies are descriptive in general and fail to establish causality. Therefore, the estimated effects cannot be attributed only to the expansion. The adoption of soybeans is an endogenous process, which hinders the estimation of causal effects. This chapter estimates the causal effects of this expansion on formal employment at the municipal level. The novel empirical strategy relies on the use of Synthetic Control Matching and the definition of a control group composed by municipalities that do not produce soybeans but meet the geographical conditions to do so. Previous studies use as control group municipalities that are not well suited for agriculture. This analysis focuses only on the municipalities that comprise the Brazilian agricultural frontier.
The results show that the expansion led to increases in formal jobs in agriculture but did not have any effects on other sectors. There are also significant heterogeneities among the municipalities regarding the magnitude of the effects. Using tools from the regional economics literature, the estimations also point to possible economies of specialization in the region.
The third chapter analyzes ranking effects in a large public university in Colombia on various college outcomes measured at different times. In particular, it focuses on three questions: first, whether students who were at the top of their classes in high school react in the same way as average (or bottom-ranked) students do when both experience low performance in the first semester of college; second, whether studying with higher performing peers translates into better academic outcomes, as shown by the tradeoff between studying with high performing peers and ranking effects; and third, whether students who receive an academic probation in the first semester of college perform differently than students with similar grades. The results show that changes in rankings do not seem to have any negative effect for students, as higher high school rankings are usually correlated with better educational outcomes, independent of students' performance in the first semester. This finding is in line with previous research about the long-lasting effects of students' rankings. Likewise, students enrolled with higher performing peers experience significant decreases in their performance. Receiving an academic probation does not translate into significantly better academic performance. The calculation of rankings and competitiveness of cohorts could provide useful tools for colleges to analyze which students might be at risk of low academic performance.
Parental expectations can exert a strong influence over children's decisions. For example, Ahiapor and Swaray (2015) find that male parents in rural Ghana are more likely to invest in boys' education than girls' education, as they expect higher returns from this investment. Favara (2007) finds that children's aspirations about education in Ethiopia mirror their parents'; thus, low aspirations from either children or parents can lead to lower investments in education. In poor rural households in Bangladesh, often parents make all the decisions regarding children's schooling and marriage (Arafat, Ahmad, & Ismail, 2021) . Policies that target parents, as in the case of asset transfers or training, but do not target children directly could have significant effects on children's education and their future occupations. This research analyzes some of the unintended effects of a policy intervention targeting women in Bangladesh on expectations about children and the potential mechanisms though which this policy affects expectations.
Recent literature has found that high educational and occupational aspirations usually lead to higher investments in education and educational attainment, and that this pattern follows an inverse u-shaped behavior. In this way, when aspirations are set relatively high and become unrealistic, investments in the future (education, assets) decrease, as individuals perceive they are unlikely to reach such goals (Ray, 2006; Janzen et al., 2017) . Although in this research we refer to expectations and aspirations interchangeably, we focus on the former. The main difference between the two concepts is that aspirations have no constraints, as individuals select what they desire independent of their current conditions (income, education, etc.), whereas expectations are bounded by their current situations (Janzen et al., 2017) .
Aspirations (and expectations) are influenced by the socioeconomic context and cultural norms. In an influential paper, Appadurai (2004) argues that poor households have lower capacity to "aspire" because of their lack of opportunities. This means that the poor lack the experiences, information, and the material means to explore different options for their future. In this vein, Dalton, Ghosal, and Mani (2014) argue that this "aspiration failure" is a consequence of poverty, and this causality does not apply in the opposite direction. Subsequently, it is not surprising that parents from the poorest backgrounds are less likely to expect their children to go to college or have access to high-paid jobs (Favara, 2007) . Although income plays a major role in shaping expectations, aspects such as gender or living in rural areas are also important determinants of expectations.
Bangladesh has characteristics of a "patriarchal" society, where men have more opportunities outside the household and control over assets than women do. For example, practices such as transferring assets and properties through the male line, which could leave women under resourced and more vulnerable to poverty, are common in the country (Kabeer, Huq, & Rahaman, 2021) . Similarly, the Purdah norms reduce women's mobility, restricting their economic activities to those that could be performed within the household (Kabeer, Mahmud, & Tasneem, 2018) .
Consequently, most women in rural Bangladesh are occupied in household chores. Although initiatives such as the Female Secondary School Stipend program (FSSSP), which covers school fees and provides a stipend for secondary education to girls in rural areas, had significant effects on improving access to jobs and decreasing early marriages (Hahn, Islam, Nuzhat, Smyth, and Yang, 2017) , the expectations about boys and girls in society are still widely different. While it is commonly expected for girls to secure a "good" marriage, as dictated by the gender norms, boys enjoy more flexibility (Arafat, Ahmad, and Ismail 2021) . Given this context, it is not surprising that some of the main causes for dropping out of school for girls in poor rural areas are related to early marriages or household chores, whereas for boys it is usually work (Hasnat, 2017) . At the same time, this context leads women to be economically dependent on their spouses (Arends-Kuenning & Amin, 2001) , and consequently, parents prioritize their daughters' marriages over their education.
Although expectations are heavily dependent on the context, different studies have shown that individuals can be influenced to modify their expectations. Expectations can be shaped through the influence of role models, such as in the case of India, where girls in regions with reserved quotas for women in leadership positions were more likely to aspire to jobs that require an education (Beaman, Duflo, Pande & Topalova, 2012) . They could also be influenced through inspirational speeches, as in the case of Ethiopia, where parents who were exposed to motivational speeches from local leaders as part of a randomized control trial changed their expectations about their children's education and increased their expenditures on education, which translated into higher enrollment and hours devoted to studying for children (Bernard, Dercon, Orkin & Taffesse, 2019) . Interactions with social leaders can also affect expectations. For example, women participating in a conditional cash transfer program (CCT) in Nicaragua and who were exposed to frequent interactions with social leaders invested more in education and diversified their income sources (Macours and Vakis, 2009) . Thus, interventions that produce positive changes in expectations can lead to significant improvements in education and reductions in child marriage.
This research analyzes how expectations about children's occupations are affected by the graduation program from the Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee (BRAC) called Targeting the Ultra-poor (TUP), where participants receive a one-time transfer to invest in productive assets (predominantly livestock), as well as training, coaching, and a stipend before the asset starts producing. It also explores some of the potential channels thorough which the intervention produces effects. First is through a wealth effect, as households experience reduced stress levels as their constraints caused by the lack of income are eased. This easing of constraints makes it easier for households to consider long term investments, such as education. The second channel is through a substitution effect, as owning the productive asset (usually livestock) can increase the opportunity costs of children's time spent studying and create tradeoffs between the time devoted to studying and the time children spend work with the asset. The third channel involves changes in parents' perceptions about education, as it is included in the coaching/life skills training component of the program. Further, the paper explores whether the effects on expectations are linked to changes in educational outcomes, such as changes in enrollment and drop-out rates.
Because "low expectations" may lead to lower educational achievement, it is important to understand whether and how policy interventions such as graduation programs affect participants'
expectations. Previous research has found that the BRAC TUP program led to significant increases in household welfare, particularly in food security, consumption, asset accumulation, income, and savings (Bandiera et al. 2017) . Households who received the treatment also experienced increases in education expenditures and on the time that children spent in livestock activities (Sulaiman, 2015; Bandiera et al., 2017) . However, none of these studies report significant changes in educational attainment and enrollment. This lack of significant results could be due to the program not incentivizing (or disincentivizing) households to pursue higher educational attainments. It could also be the result of households not being able to translate higher expectations into behaviors that could lead them to fulfill these expectations (i.e., expecting children to obtain high grades but increasing the time they spend in household chores).
This research also explores whether the intervention is producing effects that challenge gender norms, which could contribute to reducing the disparities between men and women in Bangladesh in terms of access to jobs and economic independence. For example, the main occupation for mothers in our dataset is household chores (87.6%), followed by agricultural laborers (4.6%) and maids (4.5%). We do so by exploring differential effects of the BRAC-TUP intervention on expectations by gender. Further, as we explore the effects of the program on the mindset of participants (expectations), these effects could prevail in the future, even after beneficiaries experience negative income shocks or lose assets. This is particularly important, as previous research found that some beneficiaries from BRAC-TUP fell back to the initial levels of consumption and welfare after 4 years of the intervention (Bandiera et al 2017 , Balboni, Bandiera, Burgess, Ghatak, & Heil, 2022) foot_0 , or resorted to activities such as begging (Misha, Raza, & Ara, 2019) and did not "graduate" from poverty.
This research contributes to the literature about the non-economic and unintended effects of graduation programs. Previous studies have analyzed the effects on the perception of physical and mental health, using measures such as happiness, anxiety, and stress levels, political awareness, and the participation of women in decision making and control over the resources received from the program (Roy et al. 2015; Bandiera et al, 2017) . However, no other studies have analyzed the effects of the program on expectations. Additionally, though graduation programs have different components that are difficult to disentangle, this research points to the potential importance of some of these components and their effects on expectations. Literature about conditional and unconditional cash transfer programs has explored how expectations and aspirations are affected mostly through wealth effects and the conditionality of the transfer (Gebremariam, Lodigiani, & Pasini, 2017; Cirillo, 2019; Garcia, Harker, & Ricaurte, 2019) .
Although this literature explores contexts different from Bangladesh, such as Latin America and Africa, some papers like Cirillo (2019) suggests that mechanisms such as having a sense of belonging could be more important than merely the wealth effects. Nevertheless, the effects on expectations of more complex interventions than CCTs, such as graduation programs, have not received much attention.
Our research also explores heterogenous effects based on differences in expectations. In general, the evaluations of the graduation programs focus on the average effects (Kabeer, 2019) , and the heterogeneity is usually based solely on income percentiles (as in Bandiera et al., 2017) ;
we argue that heterogenous expectations could lead to different outcomes. In this way, we analyze whether expectations are correlated with observable behaviors, such as enrollment and drop-out rates. Finally, we connect our research to the literature on poverty traps, both in the standard definition, where a poverty cutoff is measured in terms of the lack of income or wealth, as in the case of Balboni et al (2022) for Bangladesh, as well as with more recent approaches that consider both internal and external constraints (Lybbert & Wydick, 2018) . External constraints refer to income and wealth, whereas internal constraints are related to the perceptions and beliefs of individuals about their lives. In this way, interventions are successful when households can overcome both types of constraints.
in 1,309 villages from 13 of the poorest districts in the country foot_1 . The households are surveyed at the baseline (2007) and two follow-up rounds (2009 and 2011) . Although the participants were also surveyed in 2014 and 2018, these follow-up surveys were not available for this project. The intervention, as is the case for most graduation programs, includes several components: a) the transfer of productive assets, mainly a combination of different livestock packages (including cows, goats, and poultry) valued at approximately USD$560 in PPP terms. Households were encouraged to hold the asset for at least 2 years; b) technical training with livestock specialists, focused on the best practices associated with the different stages of livestock production; c) lifeskills awareness and coaching sessions, which include topics such as hygiene, nutrition, family planning, savings, marriage, legal and political awareness, the importance of children's education, among other topics; d) weekly cash stipends for the first 40 weeks after the asset is transferred (Bandiera et al., 2017 , Gulesci, 2021) .
Although the program targets only the Ultra poor households (who represent around 6% of the country's total population), the dataset BRAC-TUP also follows households who are not eligible to participate in the program. This feature provides information to evaluate whether the gap between wealthier households and participants has been closing. The program has two sets of criteria for eligibility: exclusion and inclusion criteria. Eligible households must satisfy at least three (out of five) inclusion criteria and none of the exclusion criteria (see Krishna, Poghosyan and Das, 2012; Bandiera et al, 2017) foot_2 .
The selection process for BRAC-TUP uses a series of steps, following a randomized control trial (RCT) at the BRAC branch level. First, households are classified into four groups depending on their income level: ultra-poor, other-poor, middle-class, and upper-class. As previously mentioned, only the ultra-poor are eligible for treatment. Then, the program selects the subdistricts with two BRAC branches and randomly selects the villages located within 8 Km of these branches. The branches (and its surrounding villages) are assigned to either treatment or control groups. All eligible households located in the villages assigned to the treatment group receive the package of benefits described previously. Finally, villages assigned to the control group received the assets and technical training in 2011 (after the second follow-up), while the treatment group received the assistance in 2007. This design is proposed to prevent spillovers at the village level (Bandiera et al., 2017 , Gulesci, 2021) . The goal of the program is to "graduate" households from poverty using a combination of components. The reasoning behind providing ultra-poor households with livestock is explained as wealthier households (non-poor) rely more on livestock activities and less on seasonal labor than poor households do.
The dataset contains information about the expectations of both parents about the expected occupation of their eldest son and eldest daughter for each survey wave ("What would you like your [] to do?"), whether they expect their eldest children to get married in the next 2 years, and how much dowry they expect to receive (or give). Because the expectations from both parents are highly correlated 4 and not all households identify/include a father, we use the expectations from mothers for the analysis. Note that the questions asked to the participants capture expectations rather than aspirations. Expectations about occupations are organized into 42 types of responses, which are then classified into 4 categories depending on the potential years of education that are required: i) "don't know" (which could mean the parents haven't thought about their children's future occupations, they don't see it as in their control, or they don't want to tell the interviewer;
ii) Traditional, or occupations that do not require high school. These occupations are mostly onfarm for girls (housewife, household land cultivation) and off the farm for boys; iii) Aspirational, for occupations that require a high school diploma, mainly government jobs, teachers, and professionals; iv) other occupations, which are ambiguous in terms of their school requirements, such as sales, NGOs, or private employees; large scale business, etc.
Table 1.1 shows this classification in detail (see also table A.1 for the number of children in each category).
Our dataset is restricted to the subsample that contains information about expectations (around 87% of the initial dataset). One important element to highlight is the difference between the sizes of the treatment and control group. The total sample size is 7,788 observations, including both groups and the three survey waves. Out of this sample, 63% (4,938) of the observations belong to the treatment group and 37% (2,850) to the control group foot_7 . There are also significant differences between the characteristics of the treatment and control groups in the baseline (see table 1 .2). For example, there is a higher prevalence of parents from the treatment group who expect their eldest son will have a traditional occupation, although this difference is not significant for girls. Similarly, a larger percentage of girls from the treatment group are expected to have aspirational occupations, whereas a higher percentage in the control group expect them to have "other" types of occupations. Our empirical strategy (difference-in-differences), described in the methodology section, allows us to account for these discrepancies between the treatment and control group in the baseline.
The estimations follow a standard difference-in-difference (DiD) approach, used in other research papers with the same dataset (Bandiera et al., 2017 , Sulaiman, 2015) . We run separate regressions by gender-age group. The age groups correspond to primary school (6 to 10) and secondary school (11 to 15) (Sulaiman, 2015) . Additional adjustments include deleting households whose main respondent varied between the survey rounds, as these respondents can provide different expectations, and removing from the sample children whose gender changed or whose ages changed by more than 3 years between the survey waves because those are likely due to data entry errors foot_8 . Equation (1.1) describes the empirical strategy.
Here, 𝑌 𝑖𝑑𝑡 denotes the outcome for the i-th child, in district d, at time t. The main outcome of interest is expectations, although we use the same strategy for other outcomes, such as enrollment or dropout rates. 𝑇 denotes the treatment variable, 𝑊 the survey wave, 𝜂 𝑑 are district fixed effects, and 𝑋 𝑖𝑑𝑡 is a set of sociodemographic variables that includes time-variant characteristics such as age, children's years of education, school enrollment status, and whether children received government stipends, as well as time-invariant characteristics, such as the order of birth, mother's years of education, household size, and level of wealth at the baseline 7 . We also include as covariates the number of siblings younger than 15, whether children have siblings older than 15 who are of opposite gender, and the cost of negative external shocks that households experienced in the last year foot_10 .
We follow two types of estimations for expectations about occupations. The first type uses binary outcomes (i.e., 1 if aspirational occupations, 0 otherwise). The second approach follows a multinomial logit specification, a standard approach used for occupational choices in the labor economics literature (Constant & Zimmermann, 2003; Gang, Sen, & Yun, 2017) . Equation (1.2)
shows the estimation strategy for the probability of choosing the j-th occupational expectation for the i-th child. Note that 𝜃 𝑗 𝑍 𝑖 is equivalent to the right-hand side of equation ( 1 )
Where
Finally, we use equation ( 1 ) to estimate the effects of the intervention on drop-out (total, due to financial reasons, and voluntary), enrollment, and the likelihood of having a private tutor (either for primary or secondary school). For each one of these outcomes, we explore heterogenous effects by estimating separate regressions based on the expectations reported at the baseline.
Private tutoring is a popular practice in Bangladesh, reinforced by large class sizes and inadequate infrastructure. This practice is more frequent among wealthier households (Hasnat, 2017) . Child marriage does not seem to be a major cause of dropping out from school in this study because only 1.7% of the girls aged 12 to 17 dropped out from school due to marriage. Additionally, while child marriage seems to be prevalent in our study (around 9.6% of the girls aged 12 to 17 were married), the intervention did not have any effect on the probability of being married 9 . To check this fact, we ran equation (1) using a binary variable that takes the value of 1 if a girl is married in period t, 0 otherwise. None of coefficients associated to the intervention are significant at the 10% level 10 .
Figure 1 .1 shows how expectations about children's occupations vary by wealth group, age, and gender. In general, parents from wealthier households expect their children to have aspirational occupations, and these expectations remain somewhat stable as children age, with parents having on average higher expectations for older children (aged 15 to 17) than for younger children (6 to 8). On the contrary, ultra-poor parents expect their daughters to have traditional occupations, whereas for their sons, the occupations are more evenly distributed. Parents in ultrapoor households are less likely to have aspirational occupations for their children as they age, and this change is more pronounced for girls. Therefore, this suggests that although some low-income parents expect their daughters to have an aspirational occupation when they are younger, the circumstances lead them to modify these expectations before their daughters reach age 18. For boys from ultra-poor households, this decrease in aspirational occupations is also noticeable when compared to boys from middle income and from rich households, as their expectations remain 9 Additionally, eldest daughters have lower marriage rates than other siblings in this dataset. Thus, only 1.4% of the eldest daughters were married before turning 18. 10 We explored other potential mechanisms, such as women's empowerment. Unfortunately, the measure of empowerment included in our dataset is different from the traditional measures of empowerment. Empowerment is captured through ten questions that measure whether the main female respondent can influence decisions related to purchasing land, children's studies and activities, clothing, etc. We find that more than 70% of the sample can influence all decisions or at least 9 of them. Bandiera et al. (2017) did not find that the intervention had any effects on empowerment.
relatively stable across the different ages. Finally, as it has been documented in previous literature, it is expected that women in poor areas in Bangladesh will be housewives or work in household land cultivation, which are classified as traditional occupations.
Regarding the effect on expectations, the BRAC-TUP intervention only exhibits significant effects for boys at reducing the aspirational gap, using both multinomial and binary outcomes (figure 1.2). In this way, parents from treated households are around 6 to 10% more likely to expect their sons to have an aspirational occupation, and 10% less likely to have a traditional occupation (2 years after the intervention). The effects vary by age group and time of the intervention, as they tend to be more pronounced 2 years after the intervention, and their magnitude is larger for the age group 11 to 15 than for the age group 6 to 10. Regarding girls, the intervention seems to have the opposite effects, with parents who benefited from the program expecting their daughters to be employed in traditional occupations instead of aspirational occupations. Nonetheless, these effects are usually undistinguishable from zero.
In this section, we compare the changes in expectations between the baseline and the two follow-ups. We use the difference in the transition matrices for expectations between the treatment and control groups, disaggregated by gender. In this way, positive (negative) values indicate that a type of transition is more frequently found in the treatment (control) group. Note that the estimations included here are not causal, nor do they use any confidence intervals to measure whether the differences are significant. Additionally, there are some small differences in the distribution of the parental expectations about occupations at the baseline between the treatment and control groups. Nevertheless, differences that are close to zero indicate that the transitions between the treatment and control groups are relatively similar.
Our analysis shows that there are noticeable differences in the patterns found for boys and girls. For example, it is more likely for boys in the treatment group to move from traditional to aspirational occupations compared to the control group (see figure 1 .3). Likewise, parents who expected their sons to have aspirational occupations at the baseline are more likely to keep the same expectations. These patterns are visible for both follow-ups. These transitions explain why the effects of the intervention are positive for boys. For girls, the transitions exhibit significant differences between the first and second follow-ups. For the first follow up, there are two opposing effects: on the one hand, treated households who had aspirational expectations at the baseline are more likely to keep these expectations at the first follow up. This effect might be strengthened by parents in the treatment group who reported "don't know" at the baseline switching to aspirational at the first follow-up. On the other hand, treated households with traditional expectations for their daughters are less likely to move away from these expectations. Thus, it seems that the treatment reinforces the expectations that households had at the baseline, either traditional or aspirational.
As traditional expectations encompass around 50% and there are not significant differences between treatment and control at the baseline for this category, this matrix could explain why the net effect is close to zero. For the second follow up, traditional expectations are "reinforced" in the treatment group. However, treated households with unknown or aspirational expectations are less likely to switch to traditional expectations compared to the control group.
We can conclude from this section that the main difference between boys and girls is that for the former, treated households are more likely to switch to (or remain at) aspirational expectations. For girls, there are two opposing effects. While for some households the intervention reinforced the traditional gender roles for women, who are expected to perform household chores, for some others it allowed them to have aspirational expectations for their daughters.
We analyze whether the intervention has effects on enrollment, drop-out rates, and the likelihood of hiring a private tutor, and whether there are heterogenous effects based on the expectations reported at the baseline. In line with previous research (see Sulaiman, 2015) , we do not find any effects on enrollment or drop-out rates, nor are there heterogenous effects based on the expectations at the baseline. However, we find positive and significant effects of the intervention on the likelihood of hiring a private tutor for girls, and the effect is only significant for those parents who had aspirational occupations at the baseline. Figure 1 .4a) shows that girls aged 6 to 10 from treated households with aspirational expectations are 27% more likely to hire a private tutor after 2 years, and around 40% more likely to do so 4 years after the intervention. Note that the effects are only significant for girls in primary education, for which enrollment rates are high in Bangladesh. As we discuss in the robustness check, these results do not hold for other empirical specifications, so the results should be regarded with caution. Putting these results together, it seems that closing the gap in terms of expectations is not translated into improvements in observable outcomes (i.e., enrollment), and in the few cases where there are significant effects, these are only applicable to children in primary school (ages 6 to 10).
Although these results might sound pessimistic, there is evidence that treated households increased their expenditures on children's education (Sulaiman, 2015) . While we find the same pattern in our dataset, we do not analyze expenditures in education in more detail, as expenditures are calculated at the household level and not separately for each child. Additionally, we evaluate whether the program reduced the likelihood of children to drop out due to financial reasons (cannot afford expenses, or children must workoutside or at home -). We contrast these effects with dropping out voluntarily, as children state that the main reason for not going to school is because they do not want to, as in the case the intervention could have created other job opportunities that pulled children out of school. The results suggest that the intervention did not have significant effects at reducing dropping out rates due to financial reasons ( see figure 1.4b) ). Overall, the intervention had minor effects on educational outcomes.
There are three potential channels through which the BRAC-TUP intervention can affect participants' expectations: wealth effects, changes in in the valuation of education, and substitution effects. These channels are linked to the various components of the intervention. It is worth highlighting that it is not possible to disentangle the components of the program from one another, as the beneficiaries of the intervention receive all of them. Consequently, we cannot determine the magnitude of the effect for each of these channels. Our approach is simply to analyze which channels might be more relevant at explaining changes in expectations.
The literature shows that in general cash transfers (either conditional or unconditional) are associated with increases in aspirations related to income, assets, and social status (Mahli, 2020), and years of education and educational attainment (Gebremariam, Lodigiani, & Pasini, 2017; Cirillo, 2019; Garcia, Harker, & Ricaurte, 2019) . Additionally, La Ferrara (2019) finds positive effects of a graduation program on parents' expectations about children, particularly related to increases in the expected age of marriage for women. The only exception we noticed to these findings is Contreras Suarez and Cameron (2016) , who find that the program Familias en Acción, a conditional cash transfer program in Colombia, did not have any effect of changing the aspirations of the participants. In fact, the authors find that parents of beneficiary children believed that they were less likely to finish tertiary education than parents whose children did not benefit from the program. In our study, the wealth effect is generated by both the asset transferred and the stipend that beneficiary households receive.
Lack of income has been linked to changes in individuals' perceptions that could hinder their ability to invest in a better future as shown by literature pointing to the negative effects that lack of income has over individuals' motivation and stress levels (Mahli, 2017) . Individuals with higher stress levels are more prone to short-sighted behaviors and are more risk-averse, leading them to stop investing in asset accumulation or education. Therefore, the provision of assistance in the form of cash or in-kind transfers, as well as assets, could help them by reducing the stress caused by the uncertainty caused by the unsteady income (Mahli, 2017) and inability to smooth consumption (Gebremariam et al, 2017) . Transfers also improve the psychological well-being of participants by providing them with financial security that enables them to regain control of their lives and fulfill their expectations (Samuels & Stavropoulou, 2016) , or by providing them with symbolic needs, such as new uniforms or better meals (Adato, Devereux, & Sabates-Wheeler, 2016) . Transfers can also increase trust in the government, as individuals perceive that they have access to a safety net (Mahli, 2017) .
In the poverty literature, wealth effects are also linked to the existence of poverty traps. In a recent paper by Balboni et al. (2022) , the authors estimate the cutoff for classifying households into a poverty trap using the same context as ours (BRAC-TUP in Bangladesh). The authors find that those households that were not pushed far enough from the poverty trap after receiving the intervention return to their low initial levels of consumption, and do not "graduate" from poverty.
Related research has found that the benefits of the BRAC-TUP intervention do not spread to all participants (Bandiera et al., 2017 , Misha, Raza, & Ara, 2019) . Thus, these households who did not benefit could face the same conditions that limit perceptions described above, such as higher levels of stress and short-sighted behaviors, among others.
Here, we explore wealth effects by separating households into two levels of wealth, consistent with how poverty traps operate, as well as by analyzing the effects that the intervention had on some of the variables related to the lack of income: anxiety, discount rates, and risk attitudes. For this purpose, we split the sample into 2 groups (outside the poverty trap = 1, in the poverty trap= 0) using the cutoff estimated by Balboni et al (2022) for the BRAC-TUP setting. We measure this cutoff at the first follow up because at the baseline only a small percentage of the households were above the poverty trap. Additionally, because if there exists a wealth effect, it should be stronger at the first follow-up, when households already received the asset and are able to move over the poverty trap. We use a triple DiD approach, where the treatment variables (𝑊 𝑡 , 𝑇 𝑖 )
are interacted with the binary variable of wealth. Using the notation from equations (1.1) and (1.2), equation (1.3) shows the estimation procedure using the triple DiD approach, where 𝐼 𝑖 denotes the binary variable capturing the poverty trap at the first follow-up. Similar to the previous estimations, we use wealth at the baseline and not at the first follow-up as a control variable.
𝑌 𝑖𝑑𝑡 = 𝜃 𝑗 𝑍 𝑖 + 𝜌𝐼 𝑖 + 𝜌 𝑡 2 𝑇 𝑖 𝐼 𝑖 + ∑ 𝜌 𝑡 3 𝑊 𝑡 𝐼 𝑖 2 𝑡=1 + ∑ 𝜉 𝑡 (𝑊 𝑡 𝑇 𝑖 𝐼 𝑖 ) 2 𝑡=1 (1.3) Balboni et al. (2022) estimate the threshold for a poverty trap at 9,309 Bangladeshi taka (US$504 PPP) in wealth 11 . The authors find that only those households who were able to escape
the poverty trap benefitted from the program and were able to increase their assets and consumption 4 years after the intervention 12 . More interestingly, the authors find that these effects persist after 11 years by surveying the households in 2018. Following this logic, we estimate whether there are differential effects for households above and below the poverty trap cutoff. The results show that there are not significant differences in expectations between households above and below the poverty trap (figure 1.5). The only difference is that households above the poverty cutoff seem less likely to expect their boys aged 11 to 15 to have aspirational occupations relative to those below the poverty cutoff. However, these effects are not linked to changes in traditional occupations. These results remain constant to other empirical specifications, such as comparing the coefficients from separate regressions for each of the wealth groups.
To complement the analysis of the previous section, we explore whether the intervention affected indicators associated with income constraints. We focus on four variables: discount rates, risk aversion, anxiety, and happiness. As we discussed previously, the literature shows that low levels of income lead households to make short-sighted decisions, such as reducing investments in productive assets or education. Similarly, households with low levels of income are usually more risk averse and exhibit higher levels of anxiety 13 .
11 Balboni et al. (2022) find that prior to the intervention, only 6% of the Ultra-poor households who were targeted had a level of wealth above the cutoff. After the intervention and receiving the assets, slightly less than 60% were able to surpass this cutoff in our sample. We measure the wealth reported at the first follow-up and classify households into two groups: those above the poverty trap cutoff (1), and those below (0). Assets include land, business and nonbusiness assets, and savings. 12 Balboni et al. (2022) show that around 66% of the households were above the poverty trap cutoff after receiving the transfer (p.809). 13 Although we link these variables to the effects produced by the lack of income, they can also be affected by other components of the program. For example, happiness or anxiety could be influenced by the coaching and life skills training sessions.
Discount rates are measured using two questions asked to the main female respondent, "Would you like to receive 200 takas (BTK) today or 250 in 1 month?", and for those who chose the option that gives 250 in the future, the next question asks, "How many more months would you be able to wait to receive 250?" Based on these questions, we construct a discount rate that measures the number of months households would be willing to wait to receive 50 extra takas. It is important to highlight that 200 BKT in 2007 were equivalent to around USD$25 in PPP 14 . This is a significant amount, considering that the poverty line was established in USD$1.25 per person per day for 2007 (Bandiera et. Al, 2017) . We do not find significant effects of the intervention on discount rates.
We do not find effects of the intervention on risk attitudes or anxiety. To measure risk attitudes, participants are asked during the two follow-ups (and not at the baseline) to choose between four hypothetical lotteries, each one with two outcomes with equal probabilities (win/lose). Lottery one pays 100 BTK for both outcomes; lottery 2 pays 200 if winning and 60 if losing; lottery 3 pays 300 and 20; and lottery 4 pays 400 and 0 respectively. Although lottery 4 has the highest expected outcome (200), it is also the riskiest. Overall, households rank lottery 4 first (40%), followed by lottery 1 (36%), lottery 2 (14%), and lottery 1 (10%). We measure anxiety based on the question "Did you suffer any mental anxiety that hampered your daily activities last month?", and we select those households who reported that the most important reason for anxiety is "financial scarcity at home." Other reasons for anxiety, such as quarrels with spouses, concerns about children, among others, were not considered. In general, more than 63% of the households reported feeling anxious and 46% were anxious due to economic reasons.
Regarding happiness, we find that treated households were more likely to answer that they consider their lives as "happy" or "very happy". At the baseline, most of the ultra-poor households answered that they felt unhappy with their lives (59%). After the first follow-up, this percentage decreased to 43% and remained around the same (41%) for the second follow-up foot_12 . These results are in line with qualitative research conducted for the same population, which shows that participants' levels of happiness increased with the intervention (Roy et al, 2015; Kabeer, 2019) 16 .
Additionally, we explore whether happier households are more likely to have aspirational expectations about children using a triple D-in-D approach. We estimate positive effects on happiness attributable to the intervention (See Table 1 .3). However, we do not find heterogenous effects on expectations for children based on the level of happiness reported by the households at the baseline.
Overall, we do not find that the intervention had any effects on the variables associated with the lack of income. This could be a result of the low levels of income of the population targeted by the intervention, as even after receiving the treatment these households remain relatively poor compared to the average in Bangladesh. It could also indicate that the effects of the program were not large enough to produce changes in these variables.
Despite these results, we cannot rule out wealth effects, nor can we argue that increases in income do not have any effects on educational outcomes. For example, there is evidence that treated households increased their expenditures on education relative to the control group (Bandiera et al, 2017; Sulaiman, 2015) . However, changes in income might not be the main driver for changes in expectations. For this reason, the results are similar for both groups of wealth. One potential explanation is that for households to have higher expectations about their children's future it is necessary to have a minimum level of income. However, once that level of income is reached, other components, such as access to information, education, or the existence of role models can shape those expectations more finely. Additionally, the BRAC-TUP intervention has different components that act in conjunction with each other. Hence, changes in the mindset of participants (for example, through coaching) can only be observable after the material needs are fulfilled (through the provision of the asset or the monthly stipend).
Although international evidence suggests that more productive assets in the household are correlated with better educational outcomes (Ansong et al, 2019) , some studies have found negative effects. For example, Kafle, Jollife, and Winter-Nelson (2018) find that the acquisition of agricultural assets reduces school enrolment in Tanzania, and the effect is larger for children of crop producers in rural areas. These effects are the result of a tradeoff between hours studying and hours working with the productive asset. Thus, as the BRAC-TUP intervention seeks to increase agricultural asset ownership among beneficiaries, if receiving these assets forces children to reduce the hours dedicated to their studies or to drop out of school, the intervention would have negative effects on educational outcomes. This could be explained by the expected net returns of sending children to school being offset by the gains of children exploiting the asset and spending more time in household production (Cockburn & Dostie, 2007) . These results could be reinforced if the expectations about children are traditional, or if they switch to traditional. For example, if parents perceive that agricultural activities could be viable long-term occupations to secure children's future wellbeing. Similarly, because some parents in rural areas express concerns about sending their daughters to school due to security reasons, girls could be more prone to remain at home involved in livestock activities after receiving the asset (Hasnat, 2017) . The availability of productive assets changes the cost/benefit calculation of sending children, and especially girls, to school.
Because our dataset does not contain information about the hours children devote to their studies, it is not possible to calculate a tradeoff between livestock activities and time studying.
Instead, we take a different approach. First, we evaluate whether changes in the time spent in livestock activities are large enough to offset the time children spend studying. Then, we analyze whether livestock activities rely mostly on the adult members of the household, particularly women, or on children. Regarding the former item, Sulaiman (2015) found that the BRAC-TUP intervention increased the yearly hours in livestock activities after 2 years between 33 and 35 hours for boys and girls aged 6 to 10, and by around 122 hours for the age group 11 to 15 for both boys and girls. This means that on average, there are no significant differences between boys and girls, and the increases are less than 1 hour per week for younger children, and less than 2.5 hours per
week for older children. The effects 4 years after the intervention are even lower. Our estimations are similar but larger in magnitude than Sulaiman's, considering that we use a subsample comprised only by the eldest children within each household. Given these results, it seems unlikely to think that on average the intervention created a tradeoff between livestock activities and study time, or that it induced parents towards more traditional expectations. As we show later in this research, the intervention did not have any effects on voluntary drop-out rates 17 .
Related to which members of the household experienced the largest increases in livestock activities, the estimations show that mothers (main female respondents) had the largest increase, with an average of 18.5 hours per week for the first follow up, and 14.6 for the second follow up, relative to the control group (See
table 1.4). Other adult female members (aged 18 to 50) had the second largest increases with 5.2 and 4.1 hours per week respectively, followed by fathers (spouses of the main female respondent) with 4.0 and 3.6 hours per week respectively. These are significant increases, considering that the average time that mothers spent in livestock activities at the baseline was on average 7.1 hours per week, compared to only 1 hour per week for their spouses and 3 hours for other adult female members, the second highest time allocation at the baseline. At the baseline, children spent almost no time involved in livestock activities (1 hour for children aged 11 to 15). In this way mothers, who are the main target of the BRAC-TUP intervention, assumed
the main responsibility for livestock activities, receiving help from other household members. This help seems to be evenly distributed among other household members, except for young children and other male adult members. Although it is possible that for some children the time allocation to livestock activities increased dramatically after the intervention and could have affected their studies negatively, this pattern does not seem to be prevalent for the average child.
Changes in the valuation of education are linked to the life skill training and coaching sessions provided by the intervention. The life skills training consists of group sessions conducted on a weekly or biweekly basis. Each session lasts around 20 to 30 minutes and is usually
around 6 hours per week for both follow-ups), whereas children aged 11 to 15 increased the time allocated to other activities in the first follow-up only (by 3 hours per week). This could indicate that children provided extra help with the household in the short run, while the treated households adapt to the new economic activity (livestock). However, the effects of the intervention at reducing schooling time should be minimal (see table 1.4).
accompanied by other activities such as collecting savings, which ensures the attendance of participants. The life skills training included 12 social and health issues 18 . Each session addressed only one topic, and these topics rotated until they were covered at least 6 times. These trainings were complemented and reinforced with weekly house visits, where the program facilitators provided coaching sessions and checked the conditions of the households (in terms of hygiene, school attendance, etc.) and the conditions of the livestock received as the asset. On average, the house visits lasted for around 20 to 30 minutes. Both life skills and coaching sessions were extended to other household members depending on the topics discussed (Dharmadasa, Hashemi, Samaranayake, & Whitehead, 2015; Moqueet, Zaremba, & Whisson, 2019) .
Recent research shows the relevance of the coaching/life skills sessions component in policy interventions. For example, Banerjee, Karlan, Osei, Trachtman, and Udry (2022) suggests that using only the asset transfer component of a graduation program in Ghana does not produce the same effects as the whole intervention does in terms of assets and income, pointing to the importance of components such as training and coaching, either independently or by complementing the transfer component. Similarly, Roelen and Devereux (2019) highlight the importance of coaching and training in Burundi using quantitative and qualitative methods. The authors find that training and coaching sessions are a fundamental complement to the cash and asset transfers. Additionally, these components create spillover effects, which result from interactions between participants and non-participants, direct exposure when non-participants interact with the staff of the intervention, and "demonstration effects," when non-participants mimic the behaviors of participants. Raza, Van de Poel, and Van Ourti (2018) , who also analyzed the BRAC-TUP intervention in Bangladesh, find that non-eligible poor households located in treated villages had improvements in child nutrition (as measured by indicators such as measures such as "weight for height" -WHZ -and "height for age" -HAZ -), reflecting the spill-over effects of the intervention. These spillover effects are mainly driven by non-eligible households improving the likelihood of breastfeeding and its duration, and improvements in access to a sanitary toilet. In fact, two quotes from participants in the research by Roelen and Devereux (2019) summarize the importance of training and coaching at affecting participants' wellbeing: "Coaching sessions were the most important as they taught us ways to improve our living conditions and money came to help us put it into (p. 1131) […] If we were given money without the knowledge, we would have
To analyze the relevance of the mechanism changes in the valuation of education, we explore whether the beneficiaries experienced changes in behaviors and gained knowledge related to the topics covered during the coaching and life skills training, as well as the potential spillover effects attributed to this component of the program. Because we cannot measure "what" and "how much" parents learned regarding the importance of education and investments in their children,
we use information about diet, health, and political awareness. As mentioned previously, these topics were covered during the life skills training and reinforced in the coaching sessions. Our assumption is that if households learned about these topics and were able to change their behaviors, it is also likely that they did the same with other lessons covered in the coaching sessions. Further, if there are spillover effects for some of these topics, it is also likely that the beneficiaries talked to other members of the community about the importance of education for children.
We first analyze whether the intervention had any effects on four variables: political awareness, health awareness, dietary diversity, and the probability of having their own slab latrine or toilet. We then measure whether there were spillover effects on these variables, by comparing non-eligible poor households from treated versus control villages.
As the goal is to analyze spillover effects for our main outcome variable, we analyze whether the intervention changed the expectations for the non-eligible poor households. Political awareness is measured through an index composed of 10 questions foot_16 that are coded as right or wrong. Dietary diversity uses the Household Dietary Diversity Score Index (HDDS) that measures households' consumption of twelve different groups of foods in the previous week foot_17 . Health awareness is measured through an index that comprises eight questions about specific knowledge regarding health issues. This index is intended to capture whether participants have further knowledge about some of the health topics discussed in the coaching/life skills training rather than measuring improvements in health conditions (see table 1.5). (effect) and non-eligible poor (spillover) from treated versus control villages. We calculate these effects using separate DID models for each of these groups. The results suggest the presence of spillover effects, as non-eligible households from treated villages had higher improvements on the index scores relative to their counterparts in the control villages. Note that the magnitude of the effect for the non-eligible households is smaller than for the ultra-poor, which is expected in the case of spillovers, as the effects for the non-treated groups are attenuated. Finally, the results from the placebo group in the same figure, which compares the ultra-poor and non-eligible poor within control villages, show that there are no differences between the two groups, as none of them had access to the coaching sessions. We did not find spillover effects with the other three outcomes, but the effects on the treated households are positive and significant for the two follow-ups, except for the health awareness index that it is only significantly different from zero during the first follow up. The lack of spillover effects on these variables is expected, as improving households' diets, or guaranteeing access to sanitary toilets require monetary investments as well as knowledge, and there is no evidence that non-eligible poor households experienced higher income because of the intervention. We interpret these results as potential evidence that changes in the perception of participants are attributable to the intervention, more specifically to the coaching/life skills component, and that these changes could spread across the community.
We also show that non-eligible poor households from treated villages reduced the expectation gap relative to non-eligible poor households from control villages (See figure 1.7).
One important difference with the treated households (ultra-poor) is that the non-eligible poor experienced increases in aspirational occupations for girls, and these effects are significant after four years for the age group 6 to 10, and after two years for the group 11 to 15. In fact, the effects for girls are larger in magnitude than for boys. These differences in the effects between ultra-poor and non-eligible poor households could be explained by differences in income and other household characteristics, such as parents with more steady jobs.
As robustness checks, we conduct two types of exercises. First, we show that the estimations are robust to the inclusion of additional covariates and modifications to the outcome variable. We exclude the category "don't know" from the sample and re-run the estimations. Then, we include a set of covariates related to how close (in terms of travel time) households are to the nearest schools (primary, high school, and college), health centers, bazaars, and paved roads 21 .
Second, we used more flexible DID specifications to calculate the main results. We use the Doubly Robust DID estimation (DRDID) proposed by Sant'Anna and Zhao (2020) and the Double/debiased Machine Learning (DMLDiD) by Chang (2020) . We do this for two reasons.
First, DID assumes parallel trends. Because we only have one pre-intervention period, it is not possible to empirically test whether this assumption holds, and although the data come from an RCT, the descriptive statistics show significant discrepancies between the treated and control groups at the baseline. These methods assume that the parallel trends hold but conditional on a set of characteristics (i.e., different trends for boys and girls), which is a less restrictive assumption.
Second, the set of covariates includes both time-variant and time-invariant characteristics, and some of them could be influenced by the intervention. For example, school enrollment could be affected by the intervention, but at the same time parental expectations might change depending on whether children go to school. The robust methods control only by the set of covariates that are time invariant or were collected at the baseline. In this sense, we check whether the results are robust to characteristics that cannot be influenced by the program. We provide a more detailed explanation of the methods in appendix A.
The results show that adding covariates related to distances (in time) to schools, hospitals, and other important places does not change the estimations (either in direction or magnitude). In this sense, the expectations about children do not change by how far away households are located from educational centers. On the other hand, removing answers coded as "don't know" from the sample changes the significance of the estimations, but only for girls. In this sense, the effect of the intervention is now negative and significant for aspirational occupations. There are no significant changes that result from removing the "don't know" answers for boys. The estimations with different empirical specifications are not disaggregated by age groups. Because these methods rely on an inverse probability matching, a more extensive set of covariates and smaller groups (more disaggregated) can cause the propensity score not to converge. The results show that in general, independent of the empirical specification, the intervention increased aspirational expectations and reduced traditional expectations for boys. For girls on the other hand, aspirational expectations remained constant in the first follow up, but the DMLDiD estimations show decreases in aspirational expectations for the second follow up, which is in line with omitting "don't know" from the sample. Overall, our results confirm differences by gender. While aspirational expectations increased for boys, they remained the same or decreased for girls (see figure 1.8 and table 1.6).
We also show that the effect of the intervention on variables related to lessons taught during the life-skills and coaching sessions are robust for three out of the four variables (except HDDS)
to the different empirical specifications (see table 1.7 ). Finally, we analyze whether the effect of the intervention on hiring a private tutor is robust to the different specifications. We find that the effects are highly volatile to the models used (see table 1.8). For example, none of the estimations are significantly different from zero using DRDID, but the DMLDiD models show positive and significant effects (at 5% level) of the intervention for boys and girls for the second follow up only.
Note that these results are different from the ones calculated with the standard DID, where for the age group 6 to 15, the effects were only significant for girls and for the first follow up. Although increases in the probability of hiring a private tutor might reflect beneficiary households allocating more resources to education (Sulaiman, 2015; Bandiera et al., 2017) , the results could reflect heterogenous effects that are not captured by the variables used in our estimations.
In this research, we analyze whether parental expectations about occupations are affected by the BRAC graduation program -Targeting the Ultra-poor (TUP) in Bangladesh. We then explore potential mechanisms that could explain these changes in expectations, namely wealth and substitution effects, and changes in the valuation of education. Additionally, we link these changes in expectations to enrollment, drop-out, and investments in education, exploring whether higher expectations about children are translated into better educational outcomes. Our findings suggest that the intervention reduces the aspirational gap that exists between the ultra-poor and wealthier households, but the effects are only applicable to boys. These results are robust to changes in the empirical specification, the introduction of additional control variables, and changes in the definition of the outcome variable. One potential explanation is that the intervention might not be challenging traditional gender roles. Even though this is not an objective sought by the intervention, whose purpose focuses on "graduating" households from poverty, the intervention could benefit from strengthening the gender component. In this regard, Roy et al. (2015) finds that while the beneficiary women from BRAC-TUP held control over the transferred assets, they experienced losses in terms of mobility and decision-making over other household assets. Thus, these results suggest that the benefits of the program might differ by gender. Another way in which the program might reinforce traditional gender roles is that by increasing farm income, it encourages parents to see the agricultural housewife role as an economically viable one in the future.
Our research also highlights the importance of the coaching component for complex interventions, such as "graduation" programs. Considering that the intervention has different components that complement each other, it is not possible to determine the contribution of each component to the outcomes analyzed. However, we show that the intervention improved households' knowledge in topics covered during the life skill training/coaching sessions, such as political awareness and health awareness. We also find that non-eligible poor households in treated villages also benefit from the intervention (spillover effect), as a higher proportion of the households expect their children to have aspirational occupations relative to the control villages.
Because these households did not receive assets or other monetary transfers from the intervention, the effect should be attributed to the non-tangible components of the program, such as the coaching component. Recent literature shows the importance of this component on poverty alleviation interventions and the spillovers it generates (Roelen & Deveraux, 2019; Banerjee et al., 2022) . We cannot rule out the role of mechanisms such as wealth effects, even though both the "poorest" and "better-off" ultra-poor households (as well as those above and below the poverty trap cutoff) experienced similar effects in terms of expectations.
While the intervention shows positive effects on expectations, these results do not translate directly into improvements in educational outcomes, nor are there heterogeneous effects based on the expectations that parents have about their children. We only found positive and significant effects of the intervention on the likelihood of hiring a private teacher for girls in primary school for those parents with aspirational expectations. However, these effects are not robust to the different specifications. Previous research did not find significant effects of the program on educational outcomes other than expenditures on education (Sulaiman 2015; Bandiera et al., 2017) .
These results might indicate few effects of the intervention on changing the participants' mindsets, or that the effects of the intervention beyond the initial objectives ("graduating households from poverty") are small or not immediate. We hope that this study motivates further research on the non-economic and unintended effects of antipoverty interventions. In this sense, if these interventions can generate changes among the beneficiaries that go beyond providing productive assets and how to use them properly, perhaps these households could become less vulnerable to poverty, even if they lose the assets. Similarly, if these interventions could reinforce gender disparities, this type of research could help policy makers to take preventive actions before implementing these interventions. Banerjee, A., Karlan, D., Osei, R., Trachtman, H., & Udry, C. (2022). Unpacking a multi-faceted program to build sustainable income for the very poor. Journal of Development Economics, 155, 102781. Beaman, L., Duflo, E., Pande, R., & Topalova, P. (2012). A Policy Experiment in India. Science, 335(February), 582-586. Retrieved from Samuels, F., & Stavropoulou, M. (2016). 'Being able to breathe again': the effects of cash transfer programmes on psychosocial wellbeing. The Journal of Development Studies, 52(8), 1099-1114. Sant'Anna, P. H., & Zhao, J. (2020). Doubly robust difference-in-differences estimators. Journal of Econometrics, 219(1), 101-122. Sulaiman, M. (2015). Does wealth increase affect school enrolment in ultra-poor households: evidence from an experiment in Bangladesh. Enterprise Development and Microfinance, 26(2), 139-156. TABLES AND FIGURES Table 1.1: Classification of expected occupations for eldest son/daughter Category Occupations Don't know Uncertain/Don't know Traditional Household chores/housewife, household land cultivation, laborer on someone else's land, non-agricultural day laborer, factory worker*, livestock husbandry, poultry husbandry, vegetable/nursery farming for sale, fisherman / fish-farmer, maid/servant, food processing for sale, stitching/handicraft/tailoring for sale, rickshaw puller/vandriver/boatman, street vendor, skilled labor (carpenter, blacksmith, potter, weaver, mechanic/repairs)* Aspirational Teacher, professionals (doctor/engineer/advocate/nurse), government officer, government employee, politician (ward member/ chairman)
Homestead-based business, owner/worker of shop/restaurant/hotel, large scale business (industry/wholesale), community health worker (midwife, ss, TBA)#, priest, small business, village doctor/traditional healer/homeopath, artist, private/NGO employee or officer, student.
Notes: *Considered as "other" for girls. Factory workers and skilled laborers are not traditional occupations for women. The former requires employees to have at least an 8 th grade education for garment factories and moving out of the village (Hasnat, 2017) . The latter are crafts traditionally performed by men. # It is considered as an aspirational occupation for girls. A more detailed classification is provided in table A.1. table Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. ⌂ The estimations for children by gender show slight differences. For boys, the increases in hours in livestock activities are 3.0 hours per week for the first follow up and 1.4 for the second follow up. For girls, the effects are 4.4 and 2.7 hours respectively. In both cases, the effects are significant at 1%. For other activities, the increases are larger for boys: 4.08 for the first follow-up (at 5%). The effects for girls are not significantly different from zero at 5%. Thus, it seems that boys help the household in out of the farm activities, while girls provide help in the form of in-farm activities. =1 if the answer is: prevents night blindness, prevents diseases, provide vitamins, to get calcium, improve memory, or keep skin fresh = 0 otherwise. It includes generic answers like keeps body healthy, to get nutrition, or don't know. Why is it important to use Iodized Salt? = 1 if: prevents goiter, prevents cretinism, or prevents elephant disease. Why is it important to take antiworm tablets every 6 months (all HH members)? = 1 if: prevents worms and diarrhea, prevents anemia, prevents diseases, or prevents filaria.
Why is it important to take vitamin A tablets after delivery? = if: prevents night blindness, prevents diseases, prevents polio, to get calcium Why is it important to take iron tablets during last pregnancy = 1 if: prevents anemia. Do you know every member of household should receive deworming tablet every 6 months? = 1 Yes, 0 = No Have heard about receiving a vitamin A capsule after delivery? = 1 Yes, 0 = No Have heard about the intake of iron tablet during pregnancy? = 1 Yes, 0 = No Notes: This index ranges from 0 to 8. The goal of this index is to capture whether participants learned specific knowledge from the life skills/coaching sessions. For this reason, we omitted answers such as "keeps the body healthy" or "don't know". We also omitted other specific answers that do not capture the main purposes of consuming each one of the foods or supplements described here. For example, for iodized salt, the specific knowledge we wanted to capture is the prevention of goiter and cretinism. Other answers such as "to kill worms", "makes blood clean", etc., were not considered as correct. The answers that we labelled as correct are the options displayed in the "Health Module" questionnaire from the CFPR/TUP Evaluation Project. Notes: The figure uses the three survey waves of data at the same time. Thus, the expectations about children are reported in different age groups, as children age. For visualization purposes, we excluded the group "other poor". b) Effects of the intervention -Multinomial outcomes (marginal effects) Notes: Panel a) Each group is estimated using separate regressions, with the outcome variable being binary. Panel b) Results for each group are estimated using separate regressions, following a multinomial logit model. The baseline group for aspirational occupations is traditional, and for traditional it is aspirational. The graph shows the marginal effects at the average levels. Robust standard errors are clustered at the village level: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. a) Boys: First follow-up b) Boys: Second follow-up c) Girls: First follow-up d) Girls: Second follow-up Note: the figures show the differences between the transition matrix for the treatment group minus the one for the control group. Thus, positive values indicate a type of transition that is more commonly found in the treatment group, whereas a negative value a type of transition that is more frequent in the control group. Values close to zero indicate that the transitions are relatively similar between the treatment and control groups. b) Effects of the intervention on drop-out rates (for financial reasons and voluntary drop out) Notes: Each group is estimated using separate regressions, with the outcome variable being binary. Robust standard errors clustered at the village level: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Notes: Each group is estimated using separate regressions, with the outcome variable being binary. The reported values correspond to the coefficients of the triple interaction between the binary treatment variable, the survey wave, and a binary variable of wealth. The two groups are created following Balboni et al. (2017) cutoff using the wealth at the first follow-up. This splits 59% of the households above and 41% below the poverty trap cutoff. Results close to zero indicate that there are no significant differences between those above and below the poverty trap cutoff. Robust standard errors clustered at the village level: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. C D Notes: Effects estimated in panel A for political awareness index ranging from 0 to 10 (composed of 10 questions coded as right or wrong). Panel B shows the results for a health awareness index that measures specific knowledge about health covered in the coaching sessions. The index ranges from 0 to 8. Panel C shows the Household dietary diversity index, that measures the number of food groups (from a total of 12) that the household consumed in the previous week. Panel D shows the likelihood of the household of using a sanitary toilet. For all indicators, only households whose eldest child is 6 to 15 years old were included. We calculate separate DID models for each of the three groups. For "effects" we compare ultra-poor (eligible) households from treated versus control villages. For "spillover" the estimations compare noneligible poor households from treatment versus control villages. For "Placebo" we compare ultra-poor (eligible) versus noneligible poor households in the control villages only. Robust standard errors clustered at the village level: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Notes: Each group is estimated using separate regressions, with the outcome variable being binary. Here treatment denotes noneligible poor households from treated villages, whereas the control group is composed of are noneligible poor households from control villages. Robust standard errors clustered at the village level: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Soybean is one of the most important crops in Brazil, not only for its significant contribution to the economy, but also for playing a major role in the development of the agricultural sector in the country. Soybean was introduced in Brazil by Japanese immigrants in 1882 to produce tofu and soy sauce (Martinelli, Batistella, Silva, & Moran, 2017) . However, the production of soybean at large scale in the country began in the 1950s (Vander Vennet, Schneider, & Dessein, 2016) , when farmers from Rio Grande do Sul grew the grain as a fertilizer for wheat to fix nitrogen in the soil (de Souza & Busch, 1998) . This production was initially developed in the Southern region, characterized by a temperate climate. The production then expanded to the West of the country in the seventies (Mato Grosso and Goiás), and it continued its expansion to the North. This latter expansion was promoted by the Brazilian government with the aid of Embrapa (Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation), which played a major role in the development of new soy varietals for different climates and soil conditions in the Brazilian regions, as well in promoting the use of limestone in the Cerrado biome to correct the soil pH and make it suitable for agriculture (Cunha & Espı ńdola, 2015) . In the past 30 years, states such as Maranhão, Tocantins, Piauí, Pará, Amapá, and Rondônia began producing soybean (Martinelli, Batistella, Silva, & Moran, 2017) . The production in these states is referred to as the expansion of soybean in Brazil, as these states comprise the new agricultural producers in the country (see figure 2.1).
The expansion of soybean in Brazil was mainly led by farmers coming from southern states (Rio Grande do Sul, Santa Catarina, and Paraná), and the production targeted the foreign markets (Goldsmith & Hirsch, 2006; Choi & Kim, 2016) . These farmers benefitted from low prices of land, improvements in the transportation infrastructure, favorable external prices, and access to government programs that aimed to expand the agricultural frontier in Brazil. Additionally, these farmers had access to the financial market and experience in the production of soybean, which contrasted with the households inhabiting the new agricultural areas, characterized by low-income levels and economies mostly based on livestock (Choi & Kim, 2016) . The expansion also helped Brazil to become the largest producer of soybeans in the world, reflecting the importance of this crop for the Brazilian economy. The production increased from 566 million bushels in 1991 to 4,965 million bushels in 2021 (Colussi & Schnitkey, 2021) Despite this successful growth, the soybean expansion in Brazil is sometimes labelled as a bad example of development, mainly due to its environmental effects (Vander Vennet, Schneider, & Dessein, 2016; Russo Lopes, Bastos Lima, & dos Reis, 2021) . Initially occupying degraded pastures (Gomes, De Lima, Teixeira Gomes, & Teixeira Filho, 1991) , soybean farmers began to deforesting zones of Cerrado and Amazon biomes generating negative environmental impacts (Ioris, 2017) . Some scholars argue that the deforestation of the Brazilian Amazon is in part caused by sociodemographic changes induced by the expansion of soybean. For example, Weinhold, Killick, and Reis (2013) argue that the expansion caused increases in prices (including land) and encouraged low-income farmers to sell their lands and migrate north, where prices are lower, but the lands are mostly covered by forests and not adapted to agricultural production. Other authors suggest that the patterns of deforestation vary among regions, with farmers who moved from the South and have inhabited the Amazon for a longer time being the major actors in generating deforestation (Caviglia-Harris, Sills, & Mullan, 2013) . In recent years, the Brazilian government has enacted new policies to prevent deforestation by forcing farmers to preserve a percentage of the land in forests, and this percentage depends on the biome foot_19 . Nevertheless, the effect of these policies has been limited to preserve biodiversity in some soybean-producing areas (Polizel, et al., 2021) Although the impacts of the soybean expansion on deforestation are well documented, the literature about its socioeconomic effects is more limited. Some scholars point to the positive effects of the expansion, as it brings increases in productivity and welfare due to the economic growth in the region, which could improve the diversification of local economies (Weinhold, Killick, & Reis, 2013) . In fact, although the production of soybean is capital intensive in these regions, Richards, Pellegrina, VanWey, and Spera (2015) find that regions with soybean production in Mato Grosso have experienced significant growth in non-agricultural sectors, such as services, commerce, construction, education, and health. This diversification is linked to the development of poultry, hog, and beef industries, as well as cooking oil industries in Brazil (Warnken, 2000) . It is also linked to the transformation of small cities into prosperous regional centers, where the grains are used in agro-industrial clusters or stored in warehouses and then exported to other countries (Siani & Hayashi, 2021; Oliveira & Santana, 2012; Brum, Dalfovo, & Azuaga, 2009; de Oliveira, Dörner, & Schneider, 2020) . Consequently, indicators such as the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita, employment rates, and measures of development (i.e.
the Human Development Index -HDI) in soybean municipalities had better performance than nonsoybean municipalities (Brum, Dalfovo, & Azuaga, 2009; Orlandi, Willers, Staduto, Eberhardt, & Piacenti, 2012; VanWey, Spera, de Sa, Mahr, & Mustard, 2013; Lima-de-Oliveira & Alonso, 2017; da Silva Filho, Pereira, & Miyamoto, 2020) .
Despite these positive outcomes, researchers have also found negative effects attributed to the expansion of soybean. Episodes of conflicts, violence, and tension directed against small farmers to force them away from their lands were common in the areas of analysis (Heredia, Palmeira, and Leite 2010) . Although the Brazilian government enacted policies to protect the small farmers in 1990s, these policies could not stop the migration of small farmers to the cities' slums, which exposed them to multiple forms of economic, food, and physical insecurity (Russo Lopes, Bastos Lima, & dos Reis, 2021). Similarly, scholars find increases in income inequality (Weinhold, Killick, & Reis, 2013; Almeida & de Mattos Junior, 2016; Bolfe, et al., 2016; Pereira, Porcionato, & de Castro, 2018) , and mixed findings regarding poverty. While Choi and Kim (2016) found increases in poverty in the North, Weinhold, Killick, and Reis (2013) find the opposite effects in the Amazon. Other negative effects include water pollution due to the use of agrochemicals in the production of soybean; reductions in the variety of crops, as some crops are negatively affected by pesticides; and increased gender disparities, as most of the jobs created by the soybean complex are for men (Russo Lopes, Bastos Lima, & dos Reis, 2021 ).
An important limitation of these studies is that the estimated effects cannot be causally attributed to the expansion of soybean. Some of these studies are qualitative and intend to measure the perception of the respondents regarding the expansion of soybean (Russo Lopes, Bastos Lima, & dos Reis, 2021), Similarly, most of the quantitative studies are descriptive or use correlational analysis to compare municipalities on the basis of the amount of soybean produced (Weinhold, Killick, & Reis, 2013; Martinelli, Batistella, Silva, & Moran, 2017) or compare soybean to other economic activities, particularly sugarcane and livestock (Garrett & Rausch, 2016) . Only two of the studies analyzed use causal inference techniques, more specifically difference-in-differences: Choi and Kim (2016) and Bragança (2018) . The former uses census data for 1991 and 2000, not considering the expansion that took place in the North in the early 2000s. Bragança (2018) is the only study that measures the effects of the soybean expansion in the North using yearly municipal GDP data between 1999 and 2012, combined with census data for the years 2000 and 2010 to measure households' changes in assets and access to public goods.
The second limitation is the selection of municipalities that comprise the comparison group, as most of the studies analyzed include all the municipalities in Brazil that do not grow soybean. The only exception is Bragança (2018) , who selects municipalities located outside of the Cerrado biome as the control group. These latter municipalities are unlikely to produce soybeans due to their geographical conditions. The areas producing soybeans in Brazil share common geographical and socioeconomic characteristics. The production is concentrated in clusters of contiguous municipalities (Santos de Araújo, et al., 2019) , and these clusters vary in terms of the socioeconomic conditions and the type of production, with the production in the South characterized by small farms, higher crop diversification, higher rural labor employment and higher soybean yield (Bicudo da Silva, et al., 2020). Hence, the inclusion of all Brazilian municipalities in the comparison group (or all the municipalities producing soybeans in the treatment group) and assigning them homogeneous weights (as in correlational studies or difference-in-differences) can lead to biases, as these areas can be significantly different in terms of development. Similarly, for the case of difference-in-differences, it is difficult to satisfy the parallel trend assumption, especially when there is no continuous data available (as in the case of decennial census data).
A third limitation is that the adoption of soybean occurred at different times between and within each of the regions in Brazil (Vander Vennet, Schneider, & Dessein, 2016; de Oliveira, Dörner, & Schneider, 2020) . To our knowledge, no other study has considered a staggered setting to analyze the adoption of soybean production at the municipal level.
This research analyzes the impacts of the recent expansion of soybean in Brazil within each municipality on formal employment. Our methodological approach addresses the limitations described before. We use a Synthetic Control Matching (SCM) methodology following Abadie and Gardeazabal (2003) and Abadie, Diamond, Hainmueller (2010; 2015) , as well as recent approaches by Xu (2017) and Ben-Michael, Feller, and Rothstein (2021) . This methodology does not require strong assumptions such as parallel trends, nor does it assign the same weight to every observation in the control group, which makes the results highly susceptible to the selection of the control municipalities. Our analysis focuses on the causal effects for the municipalities affected by the expansion and not their neighbors. Thus, the introduction of space into the analysis could be a topic for further research. Nevertheless, we use some tools provided by the regional economics literature, such as spatial correlations, and the use of areas of influence, a concept we describe in more detail in the following sections, to analyze how our selected municipalities evolve relative to other neighboring municipalities.
As the production of soybeans in each municipality cannot be regarded as a "treatment", we develop an identification strategy to circumvent this limitation. In this way, we define the municipalities affected by the expansion as those that experienced significant and rapid increases in the production of soybeans between 2005 and 2014. The years when these increases occurred denote a structural break in the production within each municipality and are defined as the "treatment year". In fact, we show that these increases in the production of soybeans led to significant reductions in the crop diversity index within the "treated" municipalities. The control set is composed by the municipalities that have the geographic conditions to grow soybeans but did not produce significant amounts in the period analyzed. This approach differs from papers such as Bragança (2018) , where the comparison group is composed by municipalities that have a high percentage of the area (50% or more) covered by Caatinga, a semi-arid biome not entirely apt for agriculture on a large commercial basis. Instead, we let the municipalities in the comparison group have adequate conditions for the development of agricultural production, making them more comparable to areas where the soybean production thrives. Finally, SCM allows us to estimate effects by cohorts, acknowledging the staggered adoption of soybeans in the municipalities. It is important to highlight that the expansion of soybean has occurred from the South to the North of the country, and it has been driven by geographical conditions and the suitability of soils for agriculture rather than by socioeconomic variables (see figure B.1). Therefore, the set of control municipalities are mostly located in the northernmost area of analysis.
We present two types of estimations: aggregated effects of the expansion for the group of treated municipalities, and heterogeneous effects by group, focusing on those municipalities for which we might expect larger effects from the expansion. For the latter exercise, we analyze i) the municipalities that had the largest investments, measured in terms of machinery and financial resources received (from both private and the government) in per capita terms, ii) the intensity in the production of soybeans, iii) the percentage of formal jobs in agriculture in these municipalities, as measured by the 2010 Brazilian census; and iv) the municipalities that have on average the largest values for the previous three categories. Our hypothesis is that if there are heterogeneities in the estimated effects, in municipalities where the expansion led to higher production (intensity), received higher investments, and had a larger formal sector, the effects of the expansion in terms formal jobs might be higher.
This paper contributes to the scant literature about the causal effects of the soybean expansion on socioeconomic variables. We analyze whether the expansion is linked to the diversification of the municipal economies that comprise the agricultural frontier in Brazil, as some studies claim but did not show causally. Hence, we estimate whether the expansion allowed municipalities to create more formal jobs in key sectors other than agriculture, such as industry and services. Additionally, because our study focuses on the agricultural frontier rather than on all the municipalities producing soybean, it could point to potential effects of the expansion in areas where soybean production has not expanded yet. We hope that our methodological framework could be used for analyzing other outcomes variables when longer data series are available. Finally, our paper introduces some elements from the regional economics literature to provide a better context of the causal effects estimated.
We focus our analysis on formal jobs for various reasons. Because the region of analysis is characterized by large farms and a highly mechanized production, it is relevant to understand to what extent increases in the production of soybeans translate into more quality jobs. The region of analysis has on average some of the highest rates of informality in the country. For the 2010 Brazilian census, states like Maranhão, Piauí, and Tocantins had formal rates of employment lower than 30%, whereas the rates for other states involved in the production of soybeans, such as Santa Catarina, Rio Grande do Sul, and Paraná, were above 45% 23 . Informal employees do not benefit from access to a pension, paid vacation, or unemployment insurance. Moreover, the informal sector does not contribute to the social insurance system, which reduces the social benefits provided by the government. In this sense, our work also adds to the analysis of whether the soybean expansion could be contributing to the reduction of informality in the area. Further, the creation of formal jobs could also help in the reduction of inequalities in the region, a recurrent topic found in previous studies. One element to highlight is that the formal jobs analyzed in this research are measured based on the sectors firms are assigned to, independent of their employees' occupations. In this way, jobs in agriculture could include occupations other than farming, such as drivers or engineers, if they work for a company in the agricultural sector. However, we also analyze whether there are increases in formal jobs in other sectors, as the expansion could create linkages with these sectors and dynamize the economy 24 .
This research has some limitations. First, the use of SCM requires long data series for the pre-intervention period (or the period before the adoption of soybean) to calculate the synthetic This document is organized as follows: in section 2 we describe the data and the identification strategy used to define a causal setting; section 3 describes the empirical strategy and its assumptions; section 4 provides a more detailed context of the municipalities included in group of analysis relative to the other neighboring municipalities and describes which municipalities could have the largest effects. Finally, section 5 analyzes the results and section 6 presents the conclusions.
We use data from various sources. Formal employment information comes from the
This paper focuses on municipalities located in the North, North-East and Central-West regions of Brazil. Our primary focus is the new agricultural frontier, mainly MATOPIBA (for the states of Maranhão, Tocantins, Piaui, and Bahia), as well as the states of Pará, Amapá, Roraima and Rondônia (see figure 2 .1). We also include municipalities of two more established agricultural states: Mato Grosso and Goiás. We analyze employment and crop diversity from 1996 to 2018, and GDP from 1999 to 2018, as GDP data are only available from 1999. Although the information for jobs and crop diversity is available from 1990, we choose 1996 as the initial year because most of the municipalities analyzed had been founded by then 25 .
We focus on the socioeconomic effects of the expansion of soybean. Thereby, we define as treated those municipalities where the production of soybean has increased rapidly and significantly. It should be noted that the municipalities selected represent an optimal situation for determining the upper limits of soybean production effects, since rapid changes in the production allow for less time to anticipate and strategically determine the appropriate number of hires. As a result, we anticipate greater employment growth in these cases compared to scenarios in which soybean production increases gradually over time. We define significant production as those municipalities that produced at least 60,000 tons of soybeans in 2018 foot_23 . To define rapid expansion, we focus on changes in the production trends. Based on the production series, we identify whether the production of soybean in each municipality has kinks, where the trend in the production changed. We define this kink as the year when the municipality was labeled as "treated" (see figure 2 .2). Next, we apply a series of filters to exclude municipalities where the expansion was not rapid or was followed by periods of volatility or decreases in the production. These filters are explained in detail in figure 2.3. Municipalities where the expansion in the production happened prior to 2005 are removed from the sample, as the empirical approach requires long pre-intervention information. For example, in figure 2.3, panel a) shows that Barreiras (in the state of Bahia) started the expansion in the early 1990s. Municipalities that experienced decreasing trends in the production, or a n-shaped pattern like Edeia (Goiás), are also excluded (see panel b)). Panels c) and d) show two patterns that are also excluded: municipalities that have a constant trend along the period of analysis (as in the case of Acreúna, Goiás) and production series with periods of high volatility (as in the case of Monte Alegre do Piauí). We define changes in the trends when the slope of the post-intervention period is at least twice as large as the slope in the pre-intervention period. Finally, panels e) and f) show the municipalities that we include as treated. In Panel e)
Ipiranga do Norte (Mato Grosso) had similar trends or slopes during the pre-and post-intervention periods, but there is a significant increase in the production between 2004 and 2005 that changes the intercept. We allow these changes when similar slopes on both sides of the kink go in tandem with increases in the production of 60,000 tons or more 27 . Panel f) shows the most common pattern found in the municipalities analyzed, where the production grows rapidly after a certain year (i.e., Alto Boa Vista in 2012). 27 We follow these steps: first, we identify graphically changes in the production and the year (kink) when those changes occur. Denoting as 𝑇 0 and 𝑇 1 the periods before and after the kink, we calculate the trend in the production by regressing the production of soybeans against the variable year. To rule out municipalities where the production of soybeans grew steadily, we establish a cutoff of 3, indicating that the slope (or trend) for 𝑇 1 must be 3 times as large as the one for 𝑇 0 . In the cases when the slope (trend) in the production is similar between both periods, we include only those municipalities that had a substantial increase (like a structural break) that depends on the size of the production. Thus, for relatively smaller producers (less than 150,000 tons in 2018), the average increase must be of at least 40,000 tons; for larger producers, the increase must be at least 80,000 tons. The latter cases (or structural-break type) are rare in this setting.
Out of the 1,610 municipalities in the region of analysis, 188 produced more than 60,000 tons of soybeans at some point between 1996 and 2018. Out of these 188 municipalities, all of them have less than 30% of the area with Caatinga, 99.5% had more than 900mm of precipitation per year, 87.2% had mostly flat lands and 92.5% adequate soils. Thus, 156 of these municipalities (83.0%) satisfied the four conditions, 24 (12.8%) had three conditions and only 8 (4.3%) had two conditions.
To complete the sample selection, we consider municipalities with 5,000 or more inhabitants in 2010, and we restrict the treated municipalities to those that were "treated" prior to 2014. The first condition is used as unpopulated municipalities are unlikely to have linkage effects, which is one of the main outcomes in this research (as measured through the creation of formal jobs and changes in the municipal GDP). The second condition is used to have a window of at least 4 years to evaluate the effects of the expansion of the last treated units. In total, the sample comprises 39 treated municipalities and 262 municipalities in the donor pool (control group) 28 .
Regarding our outcome variables, jobs are categorized depending on the sector of the firm.
In this way, if a firm is labeled as "agricultural", it means that all the reported jobs within that firm are agricultural jobs, independent of whether some of these positions are for engineers, salesmen, etc. Based on this classification, we create two distinct categories of jobs: direct and indirect. Direct indicates the jobs that are directly affected by the expansion of soybean, which includes agricultural jobs, as well as those belonging to the soybean value chain. The soybean value chain encompasses two types of economic activities: backward linkages or inputs, which includes 28 The selection of the control set is done as follows: Out of the 1,610 municipalities, 249 did not have information for the population in 1996, 389 produced more than 5,000 tons of soybeans at some point, and 133 had less than 5,000 inhabitants in 2010. This leaves a sample of 839 municipalities. Out of this sample, 34% did not have the adequate biome, 36% did not have adequate flatness, 25% did not have adequate soils, and 37% did not have adequate rainfall. In total, 575 (69%) were excluded for not fulfilling all the necessary conditions to grow soybeans. The final sample was 264. Additional observations (2) were lost due to missing values in other variables used for the analysis.
fertilizers, pesticides, agricultural machinery, and services related to agriculture; and forward linkages to industries that use soybeans as an input, such as the production and refinement of vegetable oils and food for animals. Indirect jobs are related to the "multiplicative effect" that the expansion can have in the municipalities, but that are not necessarily linked to the soybean value chain. This group includes jobs in sales (retail and wholesale); industry (mechanical or chemical)
and non-mineral production; services, which includes transportation and communications, food and beverages, sales, public sector, and teaching; and total jobs. Additionally, to analyze whether the expansion substituted for livestock production in the region, we include this category in the analysis. One important element to highlight is that by construction, the control group does not produce soybeans. For this reason, we present estimations including and excluding jobs in the soybean production, with the purpose of analyzing whether changes in agricultural jobs extend to other crops or only to soybean. Jobs are measured in terms of per thousand inhabitants, based on the estimated populations. As covariates we use the proportion of agriculture in the municipal GDP, the percentage of rural population, and the municipal GDP.
Our main empirical strategy is Synthetic Control Matching (SCM), originally proposed by Abadie and Gardeazabal (2003) . This methodology creates a control unit based on the weighted average of the donor units to best resemble the behavior of the treatment unit during the pretreatment period. Compared to other techniques designed for non-experimental data, SCM makes the selection of the control units more transparent, as these are selected based on the pre-treatment characteristics and the weights assigned to each donor unit are shown. Thereby, this selection is not affected by future outcomes (Abadie, 2021) . Similarly, SCM precludes extrapolation, which means that the technique will use the most similar control units to calculate the effect by restricting the weights assigned to each donor unit to be non-negative and add up to 1. In other words, SCM calculates a counterfactual for each treated unit and each outcome variable using the observations from the donor set during the pre-treatment period. During this process, usually a sample of the units from the donor set (and not all of them) receive a weight greater than zero.
The estimated effect is the Average
Treatment on the Treated, or ATT, denoted by (𝜏 1𝑡 ̂ ) for the 1 𝑠𝑡 unit (assuming that it is the unit affected by the treatment) is estimated as 𝜏 1𝑡 ̂= 𝑌 1𝑡 -𝑌 1𝑡 𝑁 ̂, where 𝑌 1𝑡 𝑁 ̂= ∑ 𝛾 𝑗 𝑌 𝑗𝑡 𝐽+1 𝑗=2
. Here 𝑌 ̂1𝑡 𝑁 is the counterfactual or the treated unit in the absence of treatment, which is constructed using the "donor pool" set of size J and the weights (𝛾 𝑗 ). The weights 𝛾 𝑗 are calculated as the ones that minimize a defined distance function during the pretreatment period (𝑡 = 1, … , 𝑇 0 ), such that 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑖𝑛 𝛾 𝑌 = ||𝑋 1 -𝑋 0 Γ|| subject to 𝛾 𝑗 ≥ 0 and ∑ 𝛾 𝑗 = 1. To generalize the objective function, we let 𝑋 1 = (𝑍 ̅ 1 , 𝑦 1 1 , … , 𝑦 1 𝑇0 ) be a matrix of covariates and pre-intervention outcomes, where 𝑍 ̅ 1 is the vector of covariates for the treated unit, containing their average values for the pre-intervention period, and 𝑦 1 𝑇𝑂 is the outcome variable for the treated unit at the pre-intervention time 𝑇 0 . The matrix 𝑋 0 is the equivalent for the donor pool. Note that the set of covariates are included in the model as the average in the pre-treatment period.
Equation (2.1) describes the distance function used Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller (2010, 2015) , where V is some positive semidefinite matrix and Γ is the vector of weights 𝛾 𝑗 :
For inference about the estimated effect (𝜏 1𝑡 ̂ ) Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller (2010; 2015) propose a permutation method, in which each of the units in the donor pool assumes the role of the treated unit, and the originally treated unit is excluded from the sample. Then, the same procedure described previously is applied to each one of these units. The estimations of 𝜏 𝑗𝑡 ̂ for each of 𝑗 ∈ 𝐽 are used to calculate confidence intervals. A major requirement of SCM is long 𝑇 0 (pre-treatment data). A short 𝑇 0 is highly sensitive to shocks, could lead to overfitting, and introduces biases in the estimations.
Note that the SCM proposed by Abadie and Gardeazabal (2003) and Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller (2010; 2015) has some limitations for our setting. The procedure is designed for only one treated unit, but our setting has many municipalities that were affected by the soybean expansion. Estimating a synthetic control for each municipality and then performing the permutation method to estimate the confidence intervals is time intensive and does not necessarily produce good estimations of the counterfactual for each one of the treated municipalities. One of the expansions of the baseline SCM model is the inclusion of multiple treated units. Although there are different procedures designed for this purpose (See Abadie (2021) for a review), we use the ones proposed by Xu (2017) and Ben-Michael, Feller, and Rothstein (2021a, 2021b) . This selection is mostly driven by the fact that both procedures are flexible enough to deal with staggered settings, as in our case municipalities started producing soybeans in different years. Xu's (2017) methodology is known as the Generalized Synthetic Control (GSC), a combination of the standard SCM procedure described previously and the Interactive Fixed Effects model proposed by Bai (2009) . Instead of being a non-parametric procedure, the GSC method is a "modelling" approach. Equation (2.2) shows the estimation of the outcome variable (Y) for the ith treated unit in time t as a function of the covariates (Z) and an unobserved matrix (𝐿 𝑖𝑡 ). Here, Y(0) denotes the counterfactual or the outcome for the treated unit in the absence of the treatment.
Note that when 𝐿 𝑖𝑡 = 𝛼 𝑖 + 𝜖 𝑡 , the model is equivalent to the traditional fixed effects model. The Interactive Fixed Effects model proposed by Bai (2009) adds flexibility by substituting 𝐿 𝑖𝑡 = 𝜆 𝑖 ′ 𝐹 𝑡 , where 𝜆 𝑖 is a matrix of unit-specific intercepts or factor loadings and 𝐹 𝑡 is a matrix of time-varying coefficients or latent factors.
Thus, the fixed effects model is just a particular case of the interactive fixed effects where 𝜆 𝑖 = [ 𝛼 𝑖 1 ] and 𝐹 𝑡 = [ 1 𝜖 𝑡 ]. 𝑌 𝑖𝑡 (0) = 𝑍 𝑖𝑡 𝛽 + 𝐿 𝑖𝑡 + 𝜐 𝑖𝑡 (2.2)
For the estimation of 𝐿 it , Xu (2017) proposes a procedure in three steps: the first step estimates (𝛽 ̂, 𝐹 ̂, Λ CO ̂) by minimizing the squared error 𝜐 ̂it , using only the observations from the donor or control group, hence we use the subscript co to denote that the factor loadings belong to the donor pool 29 . The second step estimates Λ i for the treated group using only the pre-intervention data and the estimations of (𝛽 ̂, 𝐹 ̂) obtained in the previous step. Finally, the last step imputes 𝑌 𝑖𝑡 (0)
(the counterfactual for the treated units) using 𝛽 ̂, 𝐹 ̂, Λ i ̂. The procedure uses cross-validation to select the optimal number of factors in the model, as the dimension of the vectors Λ i and F is not specified. Xu proposes another estimator for L it using matrix completion based on the research conducted by Athey, Bayati, Doudchenko, Imbens, and Khosravi (2021) 30 . We prefer the estimations of L it using interactive fixed effects, as they exhibit a smoother trend for the counterfactual. For example, with formal jobs, matrix completion shows decreases in the counterfactual after the treatment year when the trend was moving upwards in the pre-treatment period. We use matrix completion for crop diversity, as the errors exhibit lower volatility.
Xu's (2017) procedure differs from the standard SCM in various aspects. First, it only estimates one counterfactual for all the treated units, different from the standard SCM that forces the estimation of one counterfactual for each of the treated units. Second, the matching procedure 29 The author establishes two conditionals for the estimation: 𝐹𝐹/𝑇 = 𝐼 𝑟 and 𝛬 𝐶𝑂 𝛬 𝐶𝑂 = 𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑔𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙. 30 Following the notation, the goal of matrix completion is to estimate 𝐿 𝑖𝑡 such that 𝑀𝑖𝑛 𝐿
1 𝑂 ∑(𝑌 𝑖𝑡 -𝐿 𝑖𝑡 ) 2 + 𝜆 𝐿 ||𝐿||, where O denotes the number of control or donor units, and 𝜆 𝐿 ||𝐿|| denotes the regularization used (i.e. the nuclear norm).
estimates latent factors (L it ) rather than weights. This estimation produces errors and confidence intervals using a parametric bootstrap procedure instead of the permutation method. These two aspects make the GSC more efficient computationally. Third, extrapolation is allowed, as the model does not impose restrictions as the SCM, where the weights should be positive and add up to one. One important caution in the use of this technique occurs when 𝑇 0 (pre-treatment data) is smaller than 10 and 𝑁 𝐶𝑂 < 40 (number of control units). In our setting, we restrict the treatment to start in 2005 or later. This gives us at least 6 pre-treatment periods for GDP-related variables and at least 9 periods for the rest of the variables. Note that though some municipalities have less than 10 pre-periods, on average the estimations use more than ten.
The methodology proposed by Ben-Michael et al. (2021a) , known as the Augmented Synthetic Control Method (ASCM), follows a doubly robust estimation framework, in which the matching estimation (in this case the standard SCM from Abadie et al.) is combined with a bias correction term to improve the fit during the pre-treatment period. In this paper, we follow a simplified version that a) penalizes weights towards uniformity, and b) incorporates multiple treated units using a "partially-pooled" SCM (Ben-Michael et al.,2022) . The main idea behind this latter procedure is that averaging the estimated effects for each of the treated units using separate SCM could lead to poor fit for the average effect. Similarly, aggregating the estimations can provide a good fit for the average, but a poor fit for the separated treated units. The authors propose a method to balance these two estimations. It is important to highlight that the pooling could be performed by cohort, which in our setting denotes the different years when the treated municipalities expanded the production of soybeans. This procedure is shown in equations (2.3) and (2.4) following the authors' notation. Equation (2.3) shows the objective function for the treated unit 𝑗 only, whose treatment started at period 𝐿 𝑗 . Note that the objective function has two components, the first is the standard SCM described previously, and the second is the regularization term with penalty parameter 𝜆. This setting is extended to multiple treated units with the partially-pooled SCM, as shown in equation (2.4) 31 .
In equation (2.4), υ is the weight assigned to the pooled estimation, with the extreme case of υ = 0, when only separated SCM are estimated. The vectors q ̂pool (Γ) and q ̂sep (Γ) denote normalized imbalances for the pooled and separated estimations of the SCM respectively (or the biases in the estimation), which are functions of the estimated weights 𝛾 𝑗 ∈ Γ ∈ Δ SCM . The last term, λ is the regularization parameter that penalizes sparse weights. The goal of this regularization is to guarantee that the counterfactual does not rely only on a few units from the control group, unless they are the only viable match.
The standard errors for the ASCM are estimated using a jackknife procedure, which leaves one of the pre-treatment periods out of the sample and then re-estimates the counterfactual. For the GSCM, the standard errors are calculated following a parametric bootstrap foot_25 . We provide a more detailed explanation of the inference procedures in the appendix (see the section A.
Inference).
Apart from the established functional forms, the models analyzed have some implicit assumptions. First, they assume that there is no serial autocorrelation of the error term. In cases of strong serial dependence, such as unit root processes, the models will not provide reliable estimations. Thus, the standard error must have mean zero. Second, the assignment to treatment can depend on pre-treatment outcomes, but it cannot depend on post-treatment outcomes.
Mathematically, (𝜀 𝑖𝑡 |𝐷 𝑖𝑡 , 𝑋 𝑖𝑡 , 𝐿 𝑖𝑡 ) where 𝐿 𝑖𝑡 denotes any latent variable estimated in the models.
Intuitively, these assumptions mean that if there is an external shock experienced by the treatment group in the post-treatment period, this shock will be the same on average for the control group 33 .
Additionally, it means that there are no latent factors (or unobserved characteristics) that could affect both the assignment to treatment and the outcomes analyzed. It is worth highlighting that we do not find evidence of autocorrelations of the error terms during the pre-treatment period for any of the variables analyzed (see figure B.5). It is worth noting that the magnitude of the estimated effects using SCM also depends on the set of control municipalities. Because we restrict the control group to those municipalities that have the potential to become soybean producers, the estimated effects could be interpreted as a comparison between soybean producers and potential soybean producers. Nonetheless, these effects could vary if we used a different control group.
We use the R packages gsynth and multisynth (which is part the package augsynth) and complement this analysis with panel fixed-effects estimations, using the yearly amount of soybean produced in each municipality as the treatment variable, and limiting our sample to the municipalities used for synthetic control algorithms. One important caveat of the methodologies described is that the estimated weights (or the latent factors) vary for the different outcomes. Thus, the weights assigned to each municipality in the donor group might not be the same between the estimations for formal jobs and GDP.
To measure the fit of our estimations, we follow the pretreatment fit index designed by Adhikari and Alm (2016) . The index is defined as the ratio between the root mean square
prediction error (RMSPE) from Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller (2010), and a benchmark RMSPE, which is equivalent to the average of the observed outcome values. Values close to zero indicate good fit, whereas values close to 1, or greater, should be discarded as the estimations of the synthetic control is unreliable. In line with Adhikari and Alm (2016), we consider estimations with a fit value below 0.1. Overall, we only discard estimations with the most disaggregated exercises, when only a few municipalities comprise the treatment group. Most of the estimations have a Fit index below 0.1. Following the previous notation, with 𝛾 𝑗 ̂ * being the optimal weights for the i-th municipality, equation (2.5) describes the fit index.
(2.5)
The purpose of this section is twofold. The first is to show that the identification of the treatment year in our empirical strategy is sound. We do so by analyzing the effects of the soybean expansion on crop diversity 34 . If the treated municipalities only increased the production of soybeans and not that of other crops, the crop diversity index is likely to decrease. Furthermore, if these increases in the production of soybeans occurred at time 𝑇 0 , we would expect significant decreases in the crop diversity index only after 𝑇 0 . The second purpose is to show the growth of the municipalities included in the treatment group relative to other neighboring municipalities in
34 Crop diversity is calculated using the Shannon diversity index (SDI) following Bicudo da Silva et al. (2020), such that 𝑆𝐷𝐼 = -∑ 𝑝 𝑖 ln 𝑝 𝑖 𝑆 𝑖=1
. Where 𝑝 𝑖 is the proportion of crop 𝑖 in each municipality. We use a total of 69 crops to calculate the index. We calculate two types of 𝑝 𝑖 : one based on the proportional value of each crop in the municipality, the other one based on the proportional area planted.
terms of jobs per capita. For the second purpose, we compare the treated municipalities with both soybean producing and non-producing municipalities, also considering the relative importance of each municipality within the region, as measured by the level of hierarchy of each municipality, a concept that we explain later.
Figure 2 .4 shows the effects of the soybean expansion on crop diversity using both ASC and GSC methods. Both estimations point to significant decreases of the crop diversity index after the expansion. Note that these decreases are significantly different from zero immediately after the year defined as the "treatment year" 35 . This result could be explained by the characteristics of the municipalities included in the treatment group: those with rapid and large increases in the production of soybeans. Thus, given these significant changes in the agricultural production in the treated municipalities, our goal is to analyze whether these changes were large enough to produce significant increases in formal jobs in the "treated" municipalities.
To compare the municipalities selected for the treatment group with other neighboring municipalities, we use the REGIC 36 database, compiled by IBGE, which calculates the regions of influence for the urban centers in Brazil. A region of influence denotes the area of economic and social activity that an urban center shares with other municipalities that are not necessarily contiguous. These activities comprise the mobility of individuals and goods, as well as elements such as public management. A region of influence is composed of municipalities with different levels of hierarchy, a measure that denotes the importance of a city to "attract" economic activity. 35 In line with other studies (Russo Lopes, Bastos Lima, & dos Reis, 2021; Bicudo da Silva, et al., 2020) , the expansion caused reductions in crop diversity, as the index in value decreased by around 0.46 to 0.50 in the last 7 periods using both ASC and GSC, and between 0.33 to 0.36 for the index in terms of area (see figure 2.4). These changes are equivalent to decreases of at least 33% in value and 26% in area (as the averages for the pre-treatment period -1996 to 2004 -were 1.40 and 1.27 respectively). 36 For more information, see the technical details for the construction of the regions of influence in IBGE (2018) Regiões de influência das cidades: 2018, available at https://biblioteca.ibge.gov.br/index.php/biblioteca- catalogo?view=detalhes&id=2101728 IBGE classifies municipalities into five levels of hierarchy, where the large metropolises have a hierarchy level of 1, and the smallest municipalities a level of 5. Because the magnitude of the soybean expansion analyzed in this study is relatively small compared to the largest producers in Brazil, we exclude from the analysis the metropolises and focus on cities with hierarchical levels of 2 and lower foot_27 . Thus, the areas of influence are centered around cities with hierarchical levels of 2 or 3. Each municipality is thus assigned to a region of influence, except for those that are part of a population arrangement with a large metropolis. A population arrangement is a group of two or more contiguous municipalities that are highly integrated (i.e., a metropolitan area). Out of the 39 municipalities analyzed, only one of them is part of a population arrangement.
For the analysis, we include all the municipalities that are part of any of the regions of influence of the "treated" group, and we separate them by whether they are soybean producers (at least 60,000 tons produced in 2018) and the level of hierarchy (2 and 3, 4, and 5). In line with our previous analysis, we select only those municipalities with 5,000 or more inhabitants in 2010. Note that the soybean producers that were not included in the treatment group are usually more established producers that began cultivating soybeans in the 90s. We then compare the average growth in jobs per capita for different pairs of years and 2000/2001. The results suggest that overall, the "treated" municipalities had increases in formal jobs above average when compared to other municipalities that do not produce soybeans and are located within the same areas, particularly for the hierarchy levels 4 to 5. However, when compared to more established soybean producers, the treated municipalities had on average smaller growth rates (except for jobs in livestock). The results are presented in table 2.1.
To complement the previous exercise, we analyze spatial autocorrelations for the different groups of formal jobs for all the municipalities included in the areas of analysis. More specifically, we run the Local Moran I (Anselin, 1995) to identify clusters of municipalities with high spatial correlation 38 . With these estimations, we intend to check whether the treated municipalities grew in jobs per capita above the average, and whether their surrounding municipalities experienced the same pattern. In the case that only the neighbors, but not the treated municipalities, experienced a significant growth above the average, we could hypothesize that the neighboring municipalities might be absorbing the effects of the expansion, if any exist. inhabitants between 2016/2017 and 2000/2001. For agricultural jobs (Panel a), most of the treated
municipalities are labeled as high-High (high growth and surrounded by municipalities with high growth) 39 or non-significant (indicating that their growth was average, and they were surrounded by other municipalities with an average growth). There are only three exceptions of municipalities labeled as low-High (low growth surrounded by municipalities with high growth), and for two of them, one of the neighbors is another treated municipality with high-High. These results indicate that it is unlikely that the effects of the expansion for the treatment group are "absorbed" by the neighbors. For other types of employment (Panels b to f), the patterns are similar as for agricultural 38 Local Moran's I is measured for the i-th municipality as 𝐼 𝑖 = 𝑧 𝑖 ∑ 𝑤 𝑖𝑗 𝑧 𝑗 𝑗 /𝑧 𝑖 2 , where 𝑧 𝑙 = (𝑍 𝑙 -𝑍 ̅ ), 𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑙 = 𝑖, 𝑗. In this case, 𝑍 is the variable of interest, for example the growth in jobs per capita, and 𝑍 ̅ is the average for all municipalities. The subscripts 𝑖 and 𝑗 denote the municipality of analysis and its neighbors respectively. The neighbors are calculated based on a queen contiguity matrix, and w is the weight assigned to each of i's neighbors. Thus, for municipality 𝑖 , w equals 1/𝑁 for all the N contiguous municipalities, and 0 for any other non-contiguous municipality. Note that if the behavior for variable 𝑍 for either the neighbors 𝐽 or the municipality 𝑖 is close to the average 𝑍 ̅ , the local Moran I is close to zero. We use a confidence interval of 𝛼 = 0.05 to determine whether a spatial correlation is significant using the R package localmoran. This procedure is done through permutations, where each municipality 𝑖 is assigned to a random set of neighbors to calculate multiple samples of the local Moran I. Based on these estimations it is possible to infer the local Moran I distribution for each municipality. 39 We follow the standard notation, where the initial letter in lowercase denotes the municipalities analyzed and the initial letter in uppercase denotes the neighbors. For example, low-High describes analyzed municipalities with a low average surrounded by neighboring municipalities with high averages.
employment. Overall, these results suggest that there is homogeneity in the treated municipalities and their neighbors, such that if a municipality experienced significant increases in jobs, it is likely that their neighbors experienced the same. Nevertheless, almost none of the municipalities in the treatment group experienced the largest increases in jobs per capita (or are included in the high-High cluster) in services, industry, and total jobs. In fact, the clusters for these types of jobs are highly concentrated in certain areas, which could suggest the existence of economies of specialization among the municipalities 40 . Although the analysis of economies of specialization and whether soybean production is incentivizing specialization among the municipalities is out of the reach of this paper, it could be an interesting area for future research.
We hypothesize that if there exist any effects attributed to the expansion, these effects may vary depending on the characteristics of each municipality. We expect that municipalities with larger increases in the production of soybeans (intensity in the production), higher investments (both in terms of mechanization and financial resources), and a larger formal sector would have the largest effects. For example, in terms of jobs, higher mechanization means that more workers are needed to operate the machines 41 . Mechanization is measured through the number of machines (tractors, seeders, harvesters, and fertilizer spreaders) per capita for the last Brazilian Agricultural 40 As a complementary exercise, we analyze whether the closeness of a municipality to the crushing and refining facilities has any correlation with growth in jobs We use data from Trase Supply Chains ( https://supplychains.trase.earth/logistics-map ), measuring the distances with respect to the centroid for each polygon (municipality) to calculate the distances. Our results point to a small (if any) correlation between closeness to these facilities and growths in jobs per capita. 41 We hypothesize that this is the right mechanism. Note that the production of soybeans in the area of analysis was highly mechanized from the beginning. Thus, there was no substitution between labor and machinery, at least to produce soybeans. It is possible that there was substitution between labor and machines in crops other than soybean.
Nevertheless, in most of the analyzed municipalities the main economic activity was livestock. In this sense, we could think that the production of soybeans follows a fixed proportions production (or Leontief) function, where the expansion of the total production requires proportional increases in both labor and machinery.
Census in 2017. Financial resources include the average value between 2014 and 2018 of rural credits (through banks), private transfers, and credits transferred through the Programa Nacional de Fortalecimento da Agricultura Familiar (Pronaf) foot_28 , a program designed to incentivize family farms foot_29 . Formal employment encompasses less than 50% of the total employment in the region.
Using the last available census (2010), only 48% of the total jobs were reported as formal (as measured by the contributing to the official pension system) in the 39 analyzed municipalities.
There are also significant heterogeneities, as formal employment is as low as 25% in some municipalities, and it reaches more than 60% in others. For those employees whose economic sector is the production of soybeans, 67% had a formal job, denoting that it is an important source of formal employment in the region. Nevertheless, households in only 20 municipalities out of the 39-report production of soybeans as their sector of employment in the 2010 census. Likewise, only 34% of the total employment in agriculture is formal for the municipalities analyzed, and this classification includes significant heterogeneities (ranging from 6% for some municipalities, to 64%).
In figure B.2 we show the municipalities included in the treatment group by "year of treatment" in terms of intensity in the production, investments, and percentage of formal jobs in agriculture. Note that three municipalities have usually the three largest values in each of these categories: Porto dos Gaúchos (MT), São José do Xingu (MT), and São Félix do Araguaia (MT).
We expect that these municipalities would exhibit the largest effects. Additionally, we expect municipalities where the soybean expansion arrived earlier to have larger effects. In this way, we estimate average cohort effects using ASC.
First, we analyze the composition of the control (donor set) and treatment group for two different periods: 1996 to 2000, which is equivalent to the pre-treatment period, and 2014 to 2018, when all the units in the treatment group experienced the expansion of soybean production. Figure 2 .6 shows the main agricultural activities by group, based on the production value foot_30 . For the period 1996 to 2000, livestock (production of meat and milk) was the main economic activity, while soybean was the main agricultural production for only one municipality. For the period 2014 to 2018, soybean became the most important economic activity for the treated group. Nevertheless, livestock remained as the main activity for around half of these municipalities. Most of the treated municipalities are in the state of Mato Grosso, the largest producer of commodities in Brazil, whereas the majority in the control group are in the states of Pará, Maranhão, and Piauí. Although livestock is the main economic activity in the control group, other activities are also significant, such as yucca, and sugarcane in Maranhão.
Table 2 .2 compares the donor set and the treatment group across a set of socio-economic variables. The donor set is disproportionately larger (262 municipalities) to guarantee that each observation in the treatment group (39) has a good counterfactual. In general, the municipalities in the treatment group tend to have better socioeconomic outcomes (lower illiteracy rate, higher income per capita), and their economic activity is mainly agricultural, with significant differences relative to the control group in terms of agricultural GDP and jobs in agriculture. Although the treatment group tends to have smaller populations, the differences are not significant. These differences support the use of methodological approaches such as SCM over techniques like difference-in-differences. In fact, as a robustness check, we show that the differences between treatment and control are not significantly different from zero (except for soybean produced) when we use the municipal weights calculated using ASC for agricultural jobs (see table 2.8)
We present two types of estimations: using ASC (Ben Michael et. al, 2021) and GSC (Xu, 2017) . Table 2 .3 summarizes the results, including only the average effect for the post-treatment period. On this table, we include a column that shows the p-value for the null hypothesis that the effects are equal to zero, and a column with the Adhikari and Alm (2016) Pretreatment Fit Index.
Note that estimations with an index value above 0.1 are discarded for being inaccurate. Our results
show that the expansion created on average 8 to 10 formal jobs in agriculture per thousand inhabitants. These results are significant at the 2% level and robust to the estimation method (ASC or GSC). However, when jobs in the production of soybeans are excluded, the effects are not significantly different from zero, suggesting that the jobs created are only related to the production of soybeans. We do not find evidence of multiplicative effects in other sectors, as at least one of the estimations (usually ASC) is not significantly different from zero, nor do we find evidence of substitution effects between formal jobs in agriculture and formal jobs in livestock. Overall, our estimations suggest significant increases in the total number of formal jobs of 8 to 15 jobs per thousand inhabitants. In figure B.3 we show graphically the estimations for the variables analyzed.
In this section, we change the composition of the treatment group and calculate the same models described in the previous sections. Our goal is to calculate heterogenous effects for the treated municipalities, while keeping the same set of control municipalities. We create the following treatment groups based on the latest available data. The estimations from this section do not reflect significant heterogeneities among the treated municipalities regarding the significance and the direction of the effects, but there are differences in terms of the magnitudes (see table 2.4). Thus, municipalities with higher investments, higher size of the formal sector in agriculture, or higher production of soybeans did not experience significant increases in formal jobs in sectors other than agriculture. The main differences with the estimations for the whole sample is that the municipalities included in these groups also experienced significant increases in agricultural jobs in sectors other than the production of soybeans, indicating that the expansion of soybean encouraged the hiring of workers in the production of other agricultural staples. Additionally, the estimations show increases in the agricultural jobs that range from 23 to 46 jobs per thousand inhabitants (compared to 8 to 10 for the whole sample), with the largest effects for the subsample of municipalities that had higher values in all three categories (group iv).
Our purpose with these estimations is to check whether the same trends found with the Synthetic Control estimations remain. Note that the estimations using panel data with fixed effects show correlations and not causal effects foot_31 . Our results (see table 2 .5) suggest that a higher production of soybeans is correlated with more jobs per capita in every category analyzed, except for jobs in industry. The panel exercise also reflects the difference between correlations and causal estimations. Thus, even though municipalities with a higher production of soybeans tend to have more formal jobs per inhabitant (as shown by the panel estimations), we cannot causally attribute the creation of formal jobs in the area of analysis to the expansion of soybean, at least not in sectors other than agriculture. Also note that in the panel estimations there is a positive correlation of soybean production with jobs in livestock, indicating that it is unlikely to find substitutability between jobs in this sector and formal jobs in the production of soybeans, which is in line with our estimations using SCM.
As a robustness exercise, we estimate the effects for the total number of formal jobs (not in per capita terms), using the estimated population as a covariate. The estimations, presented in table 2.6, show the effects for the whole population (Panel A) and for the municipalities with the largest investments, soybean production, and size formal sector, or group iv) from our previous section (Panel B). Overall, the estimated effects of the expansion are not significantly different from zero in any category of formal jobs for both ASC and GSC. The outcome variables in percapita terms are our preferred specification. This is because the synthetic control procedures treat covariates and outcome variables differently. For example, the ASC only uses the average values for the covariates during the pre-treatment period, eliminating any time component. Thus, migrations driven by job opportunities are not accounted for in the estimations that use the municipal population as a covariate 46 . Additionally, we calculate the effects by cohort using ASC, but these estimations are indistinguishable from zero. The lack of significant results could be 46 In figure B.4 we show that inter-municipal migration is an important aspect in our setting. Between the 2010 and 2000 censuses, in 4 municipalities the population grew above 50% percent and 3 municipalities experienced decreases in population of more than 10%. Most of the treated municipalities had growth rates ranging between -4% and 20% (21 out of 39). We believe that since these changes occurred in the lapse of 10 years, it is expected larger differences between the municipalities between 1996 and 2018.
explained by differences in other characteristics, such as investments or size in the production of soybeans, being more relevant at explaining heterogeneous effects than cohort effects (see table 2 .7).
This research analyzes the effects of the soybean expansion between 1996 and 2018 at the agricultural frontier of Brazil on formal jobs. The expansion is defined as a rapid and significant increase in the amount of soybean produced in each municipality. We use a synthetic control matching approach, addressing some of the shortcomings from the previous literature, specifically the estimation of causal effects rather than correlations, a careful selection of the control municipalities and their weights in the estimations, such that only municipalities that have the geographical conditions to produce soybeans are included, and the adoption of a method suitable to a setting with staggered treatment, acknowledging that the expansion occurred at different times across the Brazilian municipalities. We find that the expansion had some effects on the creation of formal jobs in agriculture (direct effects), but there is no evidence of multiplicative effects in other sectors. Additionally, we did not find evidence of substitutability between jobs in agriculture and livestock, at least not for formal jobs.
We then look for potential explanations for these results and for this purpose, we conduct two types of analyses. First, we use tools from the regional economics literature to compare the growth in formal jobs for the treated municipalities relative to other neighboring municipalities or municipalities that share frequent exchanges of goods and population flows (regions of influence).
Our results show that the municipalities defined as treated experienced growth in formal jobs in agriculture above average when compared to other municipalities that did not produce soybeans within the region of influence, but below average when compared to municipalities producing soybeans that were not included in the treatment group. These latter municipalities correspond mostly to well established producers for which we did not have a "pre-intervention" period and for this reason were not included in the estimations. We complement this regional analysis with the calculation of the Local Moran's I, to show that overall, neighbors of the treated municipalities experienced similar patterns to the treated municipalities. For example, those municipalities that experienced significant growth in jobs per thousand inhabitants are usually surrounded by other municipalities that also experienced similar increases. Although the analysis provided by the regional economics tools is not causal, we find it unlikely that the effects of the expansion are being absorbed by the neighboring municipalities.
We then complement the regional analysis with heterogenous estimations of the effects of the soybean expansion. We measure heterogeneity in terms of four characteristics: investments (both in terms of machinery and financial resources), the intensity of the production (in tons of soybeans produced), the size of the agricultural formal sector, and a combination of the previous three categories. We expect that municipalities with higher values in the previous three categories experienced larger effects on employment. Although we find that effects are larger for such municipalities, we do not find evidence of multiplicative effects of the expansion in sectors other than agriculture. Nonetheless, the effects in agricultural jobs are significant: for the municipalities with the highest values in the three categories, the average effect ranges between 35 and 46 jobs per 1,000 inhabitants. Considering that the average population in these municipalities is around 10,000, this means that the creation of more than 350 formal jobs can be attributed to the expansion of soybean production.
Based on our results, we believe that the municipalities analyzed seem to be specializing in production of agricultural staples, mainly soybeans, with little or no diversification to other sectors. We propose two potential explanations for this outcome. First, that the creation of linkages to other sectors takes time, and only the municipalities that started producing soybeans in the 1990s were able to develop economic sectors other than agriculture. Second, that the largest benefits to the expansion of soybeans are allocated to the first producers or the municipalities that first developed companies tied to the production of soybeans, either industrial or services. For example, we find that the group of municipalities composed by the large soybean producers that began their production in the 1990s had the highest increases in formal jobs per capita in the regions where our "treatment" municipalities are located.
Our analysis has limitations and potential extensions. The main limitations are the exclusion of informal employment, and the lack of information related to other socioeconomic indicators, such as health or education, that could complement the analysis. Hence, the only healthrelated variable available for the period of analysis was child mortality, which was highly volatile.
Information about educational outcomes, such as scores on standardized tests or enrollment, was only available from 2001. Further, the last census to this date in Brazil dates from 2010.
Nevertheless, with more years of data and the new census projected for 2022, it is possible to expand the study to other outcomes, including aspects such as internal migration. This research could also benefit from the inclusion of causal spatial effects. In this sense, although our estimations point to the creation of economies of specialization, our framework does not allow us to estimate whether the expansion of soybean contributed to increased economic specialization among the municipalities, or whether municipalities that were not directly affected by the expansion (i.e., did not produce soybeans) had any effects on jobs in sectors other than agriculture that could be a consequence of the expansion. Finally, considering that the literature presented in this research shows increases in inequality in the regions producing soybeans, it is worth analyzing what types of jobs were "created" with the expansion, and whether these jobs target the poorest households in the region. If the poorest households are not having access to formal jobs, it could be a potential source for increases in inequality. Note: Mean values are shown (standard errors in parenthesis). For all variables, except those coming from the Brazilian Census (illiteracy, electricity, average income, and sanitation), the values are calculated as the average for the periods 1996 to 2000 and 2014 to 2018. For the census variables, the values for the period 1996 to 2000 come from the 2000 census, whereas for the period 2014-2018 they come from the 2010 census (the last available census in Brazil). The Economic variables related to GDP are deflated to 2010 prices. The P-values displayed show t-tests for the differences in the means across the groups for each variable. Notes: This table shows the average effects for the post-treatment period. The effects are weighted by the number of observations in each of the post-treatment periods. Thus, the first post-treatment periods have higher weights as all the municipalities have at least 4 of these periods (the last treatment year is 2014 and the last year of analysis is 2018). Estimations with a Fit Index greater or equal than 0.1 should be discarded.
The column P-Value test the null hypothesis that ATT = 0. Confidence intervals (Lower and Upper bounds) are calculated at the 95% confidence level. Notes: Estimations from 1999 onwards (as data from GDP prior to this year are not available). Soybean production is the variable of interest and is measured as a 2-year average. All jobs are measured as per thousand inhabitants. The covariates include percentage of rurality, the participation of agriculture in the municipal GDP, and lagged GDP when the outcome variable is jobs and lagged jobs when the outcome variable is GDP. The latter variables are lagged to account for the potential endogeneity between jobs and GDP. Standard errors in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Only municipalities in group iv Jobs Estimator ATT. Std. Err. Lo. Bound Up. Bound P-Value Fit Index Agriculture ASC -BM (2021) 189.698 155.364 -114.809 494.206 0.218 0.019 GSC -Xu (2017) -16.803 260.770 -527.904 494.297 0.949 0.067 Agriculture (WO soy) ASC -BM (2021) 52.986 78.512 -100.895 206.867 0.490 0.037 GSC -Xu (2017) 105.807 323.937 -529.098 740.712 0.744 0.054 Total ASC -BM (2021) 219.016 80.882 60.490 377.541 0.007 0.047 GSC -Xu (2017) 154.943 1473.582 -2733.225 3043.112 0.916 0.118 Livestock ASC -BM (2021) 57.637 75.506 -90.352 205.626 0.436 0.112 GSC -Xu (2017) 45.232 115.902 -181.933 272.396 0.696 0.194 Industry ASC -BM (2021) 1.073 3.032 -4.869 7.016 0.709 0.022 GSC -Xu (2017) -8.551 280.007 -557.354 540.251 0.976 0.360 Sales ASC -BM (2021) -6.490 17.756 -41.291 28.311 0.700 0.035 GSC -Xu (2017) -41.497 647.385 -1310.348 1227.354 0.949 0.072 Services ASC -BM (2021) -59.027 55.740 -168.276 50.221 0.284 0.088 GSC -Xu (2017) -239.108 1230.794 -2651.421 2173.204 0.846 0.186
Notes: This table shows the average effects for the post-treatment period. The effects are weighted by the number of observations in each of the post-treatment periods. Thus, the first post-treatment periods have higher weights as all the municipalities have at least 4 for of these periods (the last treatment year is 2014 and the last year of analysis is 2018). Estimations with a Fit Index greater or equal than 0.1 should be discarded. The column P-Value test the null hypothesis that ATT = 0. Confidence intervals (Lower and Upper bounds) are calculated at the 95% confidence level. Group iv) denotes the municipalities that had on average the largest investments per capita, largest production of soybeans, and larger size of the agricultural formal sector. Note: Mean values are shown (standard errors in parenthesis). For all variables, except those coming from the Brazilian Census (illiteracy, electricity, average income, and sanitation), the values are calculated as the average for the periods 1996 to 2000 and 2014 to 2018. For the census variables, the values for the period 1996 to 2000 come from the 2000 census, whereas for the period 2014-2018 they come from the 2010 census (the last available census in Brazil). The Economic variables related to GDP are deflated to 2010 prices. The P-values displayed show t-tests for the differences in the means across the groups for each variable. Figure 2.3: Selection criteria used for classifying municipalities into the treatment group a) b) c) d) e) f) Note: Figure 2.3 shows the selection process for selecting the municipalities in the treatment group. Panels a) to d) show cases of municipalities that were excluded. The reasons for exclusion are: a) the expansion started before 2005, b), d) high volatility in the production, c) the production of soybean never took off or followed a linear pattern (and it cannot be labeled as an "expansion"). Panels e) and f) show the types of municipalities that are included as treated. c) d) Note: Panels a) and c) show the effect of the expansion on crop diversity, calculated using the Shannon Index for the proportion of the value, whereas panels b) and d) for the planted area by year. The effects are calculated following the methodology by Ben-Michael et al (2021) or ASC (panels a) and b) and using Xu's methodology or GSC (panels c) and d)). Although the lags and leads (pre and post intervention periods) differ by estimation, the results point in the same direction. Contrary to jobs per capita, the estimations with GSC use matrix completion instead of IFE, as they exhibit less volatility. Notes: Municipalities in the treatment group are denoted by a yellow triangle.
The literature about peer effects has shown that high-performing classmates can have benefits on students' outcomes, such as educational attainment and labor market achievement. Not surprisingly, parents choose high schools based on their reputation, the percentage of their students who go to selective colleges, and their students' results on standardized tests based on the belief that those selective schools will bring better outcomes for their children than an average high school. However, recent literature shows that the benefits of attending such schools could be offset when students perceive that many of their peers perform relatively better in class (low rankings); whereas students attending less competitive schools (or schools with lower-performing students) could benefit from being at the top of their classes in terms of performance (high rankings). This phenomenon, known in Psychology as the big fish in small pond effect (Marsh, 1987; Marsh, et al., 2008) , has received recent attention to explain labor and educational outcomes. This paper explores the potential effects of rankings on college dynamics.
Students with similar ability but higher school rankings develop higher self-perceived intelligence and self-confidence, which is positively correlated with non-cognitive skills. As a result, these students may be more disciplined and motivated and put more effort into their studies, translating to better academic results (Elsner & Isphording, 2017) . Conversely, there is evidence that the students with similar ability, but lower school rankings, develop lower academic selfconfidence in selective schools relative to nonselective schools. For instance, Hoekstra, Hoekstra, Mouganie, and Wang (2018) use surveys to show that some students experience negative effects from being exposed to higher competition in selective schools because it makes them feel academically inferior. Shi (2020) shows that higher competition among students in selective high schools increases the number of applications to selective colleges, but only students with high rankings apply to STEM fields because these fields are perceived to be reserved for the top students. Further, Houng and Ryan (2018) argue that for average-to low-ranked students the negative effects of rankings offset the benefits of attending selective high schools, which could explain why papers that use a Regression Discontinuity (RD) approach to measure the effect that attending such schools has on test scores do not find significant results (Abdulkadiroğlu, Angrist, & Pathak, 2014; Dobbie & Fryer, 2014) . This literature also points to the relevance of measuring the effects not only on average but disaggregated by groups, such as low-performing and highperforming students.
The literature about ranking effects has focused mainly on pre-college education. The results from this literature suggest that students with higher school rankings but similar ability have better results on standardized tests in the long run, higher probabilities of receiving college admissions and finishing high school, and that these effects are attributed mostly to increases in the self-reported confidence and higher expectations of students (Murphy & Weinhardt, 2020; Yu, 2020; Elsner & Isphording, 2017) . Similarly, students with higher rankings are less prone to engage in risky behaviors (drinking, smoking, unprotected sex) and have better mental health indicators, as measured by the depression scale from the Center of Epidemiologic Studies (CES-D) (Elsner & Isphording, 2018; Kiessling & Norris, 2020) . These findings point to the long-lasting effects of rankings on students. Thus, it is not surprising that some colleges use school rankings to determine admissions. Nevertheless, there are two aspects that have not received much attention.
The first one is changes in rankings, particularly when students move from one educational cycle to another, such as high school to college. In other words, do students who were at the top of their classes in high school react in the same way as "average" students when both experience low performance levels in college, and are they more likely to persevere during adverse situations (such as failing courses)? Using Marsh's terminology, what happens when the big fish moves to a larger pond? The second aspect is related to what other information rankings might provide that could be useful for colleges in understanding adverse outcomes such as switching programs, failing courses, or delaying graduation.
There are three main objectives of this study. The first one is to analyze whether changes between high-school rankings and rankings based on the performance in the first semester of college affect educational outcomes at the college level. The big-fish-in-small-pond effect implies that top students from less competitive schools develop higher self-confidence than similar students in more competitive environments foot_32 . However, when these students transition to a more competitive environment, such as a selective university, it is likely that they might not be at the top of their classes. Moreover, it is possible that they fail some of the basic courses. Thus, the purpose is to analyze whether these students are more likely to dropout, delay their graduation, switch programs, or have different grade point averages (GPA). The literature has also shown that in general men are more sensitive to rankings than women (Murphy & Weinhardt, 2020; Ribas, Sampaio, & Trevisan, 2020; Dasgupta, Mani, Sharma, & Singhal, 2022) foot_33 . Nevertheless, these results differ by area, as some studies suggest that women who experience low rankings in college in STEM areas are more likely to switch programs to fields with more women (Astorne-Figari & Speer, 2019; Mouganie & Wang, 2020) .
The second objective is to analyze the existing tradeoff between the benefits of studying with high-performing peers (also referred here as competitive peers or competitive cohorts) and ranking effects, as for some students more competitive peers could do more harm (by reducing students' confidence and self-perception) than good (Hoekstra, Mouganie, & Wang, 2018; Houng & Ryan, 2018; Shi, 2020) . For this analysis, this research explores the difference in competitiveness among the cohorts that enroll in the university and the fact that the grading system that the university uses is not relative but absolute with respect to the goals of the course. The latter means that it is likely that the best performing student does not receive the highest possible grade, and in some cases (as it happens for difficult courses), a grade that is close to the passing grade.
This characteristic makes possible the identification of highly competitive cohorts, as those ones with significantly higher GPAs, and both significantly higher scores on the entrance exam and the national standardized test. This objective complements similar papers, where the competitiveness is measured in terms of the semester students enroll in the university (Ribas, Sampaio, & Trevisan, 2020) , or in terms of the competitiveness of the college within the same university (Dasgupta, Mani, Sharma, & Singhal, 2022) .
Finally, the last objective is to analyze whether providing information to students about their relative performance has effects on different educational outcomes. More specifically, whether students who were placed under "academic probation" in the first semester can improve their performance relative to students with similar performance but who were slightly above the threshold for academic probation. Because universities frequently have different policies regarding academic probation, there is no clear consensus about its effects on students' outcomes. These policies vary in the number of credits students are allowed to enroll, access to financial aid, access to supportive services, and GPA requirements to exit probation, as in some universities students must also comply with a cumulative GPA above a certain threshold (Fletcher & Tokmouline, 2010; Fletcher & Tokmouline, 2018; Yeaton & Moss, 2020) . In this study, academic probation acts more as a message that students receive stating that their performance was below the university's expectations. As such, students under academic probation receive the same treatment as any other student regarding credits, minimum GPA requirements to avoid dismissals, or access to services and financial aid.
The information comes from the University of Antioquia, a large and highly selective public university in Colombia. There are unique aspects of this dataset that allow the pursuit of the objectives described previously. First, admissions are granted based on the scores of an entrance exam that measures two components: mathematical and verbal reasoning. In this way, admissions do not consider information from students about high school performance, such as the scores on the national standardized tests taken at the end of high school. Although the admitted students usually perform above the average in their respective schools on these tests, there is significant variation in the scores reported by students. The scores on the national standardized tests (Saber 11) are used as a proxy of the performance of students in high school and provide the information to calculate high school rankings. Second, the entrance exam provides information about the exact ranking that each student obtained relative to the applicants within each program. This is a rare feature in the literature about rankings effects, because typically, students are not informed of their relative performance, and they learn only about it by interacting with their peers. The common exceptions in the literature come mainly from Randomized Control Trials (RCTs), in which some students are provided with exact information about rankings (Azmat & Iriberri, 2010; Bandiera, Larcinese, & Rasul, 2015; Tran & Zeckhauser, 2012) and others are not. Third, the curricula for the different undergraduate programs at the university are usually predetermined, and incoming students must take the same courses during the first semesters, except for usually one elective course. This implies that incoming students from each program enroll in the same courses, and it is possible to calculate their relative performance as they take the same classes. Note that this differs from other contexts such as the U.S, where students have more flexibility in the first semesters to enroll in different courses before defining a major. Fourth, by the end of each semester, students receive information about their relative GPA in the form of terciles (lower, middle, upper), whether they had an "outstanding" semester, or whether they are on academic probation.
This research also focuses on the information that rankings provide, or feedback effects, and how students react to this information to make decisions regarding study effort, educational attainment, and area of specialization. The literature on feedback effects mostly relies on experiments. In this way, students who receive feedback in the form of rankings achieve better grades in high school (Azmat & Iriberri, 2010) , college (Bandiera, Larcinese, & Rasul, 2015) , and higher scores on international English exams (Tran & Zeckhauser, 2012) . Similarly, other studies that rely on methodologies other than RCTs also find that rankings provide valuable information to students, and this information leads them to modify their behaviors. For example, Elsner, Isphording, and Zolitz (2021) using a natural experiment, where students are assigned randomly to different tutorial groups during the first year of college, find that the rankings obtained by students in each of those groups influences college performance and the selection of the specialization area, with highly ranked students taking more math-intensive courses. Goulas and Megalokonomou (2021) using data from Greece, where prior to 2005 students were required to take the national standardized test twice (each year of the last two from high school), show that those who took both tests and received a high score on the first test (positive feedback) obtained a specific exams or courses, but none of them analyze whether providing information about their relative GPAs for a semester could have impacts on students' performance.
This research also intends to provide practical tools for universities that help them to reduce dropout rates and the time to graduation. Because the University of Antioquia is highly subsidized, fees are relatively small for students and in some cases mostly symbolic. Therefore, some students take more time than expected to complete their studies. In some extreme cases, students remain enrolled for more than 20 semesters without obtaining a degree. This unfortunate outcome not only generates inefficiencies in the allocation of resources to the university, but also represents an enormous opportunity cost for students, who could be better off in other college programs or out of the university. An additional contribution is to provide insights to universities with similar conditions about what other information could be extracted from rankings that help them identify early students who are more prone to delay their graduation, drop out, or experience difficulties in their studies.
Rankings are calculated using the scores on the national standardized tests that students take at the end of the final year of high school (Saber 11) and the GPA obtained during the first semester of college. These rankings are measured with respect to each student's cohort. It is important to highlight that rankings are not perfectly correlated to any measure of absolute performance, and a specific score on the standardized test (or GPA) does not guarantee any student a determined position in the rankings. For example, if a student who got a score "x" on the national standardized test attends high school A, which has limited resources and less competitive peers, and this score grants her the best position in her school, she would not necessarily keep the same position had she attended school B, a more selective school. Thus, ranking effects are only comparable when students have similar ability and differences in school quality are accounted for. 10 semesters 54 . It is common that students take longer than expected to complete their studies, and one of the reasons is repetition rates. The university uses a grading system that goes from 0 to 5.0, with a passing grade of 3.0. This grading system is not relative but absolute with respect to the goals of the course, indicating that the highest performing student usually gets a grade lower than 5.0 and sometimes just the passing grade. When students fail a course three times, they are expelled due to low performance and cannot study any program in the university system in the following five years. A cumulative GPA lower than 3.0 could also lead to expulsion 55 . The programs tend to be restrictive in terms of the courses offered to freshmen students. Thus, students take the same courses scheduled for the first semester except for one elective course. This setting makes comparison between students' performance possible even in the absence of detailed data by course.
The data are available from 2011 to 2020 and include students' college performance (grades, credits, program), admission results (scores, type of admission, ranking on the entrance exam), socioeconomic characteristics (house stratification as an indicator of household economic level) and high-school information (high school name, year of graduation). The information encompasses 20 departments and 95 programs. High school rankings by cohort are built using microdata by Instituto Colombiano para la Evaluación de la Educación -ICFES. This information is publicly available and reports the scores of individuals on Saber 11 for each area of knowledge.
Recall that the exact rankings on this test are not disclosed to students, although they can have a 54 The main exceptions are medicine, which takes 13 semesters, and some technological programs with lower duration that were not considered for the analysis. 55 It is publicly known that expulsion rates are significant in the university, as the main regional newspaper El Colombiano reports in a press note. Between 2005 and 2015, the university expelled more than 20,000 students due to low performance. See https://www.elcolombiano.com/antioquia/en-10-anos-universidad-de-antioquia-saco-20- 000-estudiantes-por-bajas-notas-DF3557467 . Expulsion occurs when: i) the cumulative GPA in the first semester is lower than 2.5 (on a scale from 0 to 5); ii) when the cumulative GPA between the last two semesters is below 2.5; iii) when a student has received 3 semesters on academic probation and the cumulative GPA between the last two semesters is lower than 3.0; and iv) when a student has failed any course three times. Expulsion is automatic and students cannot appeal.
general idea of their relative performance on the test. One caveat of this approach is that the rankings based on Saber 11 scores are calculated yearly by high school, but each high school could have more than one class, and the interaction between the different classes could be low 56 . These data serve to construct cells by high-school, cohort, and college program, under the assumption that students compare their performance mainly with their classmates and not with other people from different cohorts or college programs.
The intended empirical strategy to address objectives 1 and 2 is the use of "value-added" education production functions. These types of functions are frequently used to estimate GPA and standardized test scores as functions of previous achievements and contemporaneous socioeconomic characteristics. Their main assumption is that including achievements from previous stages eliminates the potential bias produced by unobservable characteristics, such as innate ability (Todd & Wolpin, 2003) . Attending college and selecting a college program are decisions influenced not only by socioeconomic characteristics, but by students' performance in previous educational levels such as secondary school, which makes these models suitable for estimations. Further, controlling for previous achievement washes out other characteristics that could confound the effect of rankings. The value-added functions build on the research by Murphy and Weinhardt (2020) . Equation (3.1) describes the basic framework using the rankings for high 56 In Colombia, students are assigned randomly to classrooms in which they receive instruction for all the different courses (there is no assignment based on performance.). This way, since students interact mainly with the peers in their respective classrooms, the information about the results obtained by students in other classrooms could be fuzzy. However, because of the random assignment, the class is representative of the high school.
variables are calculated in the first semester of college or before, which is denoted by t0. To provide a comprehensive understanding of college dynamics, the set of outcome variables includes GPA and credits earned (in the following semester, after two years, and after 4 years); the probabilities of switching programs, being expelled due to low performance, having an outstanding semester, and being under academic probation; and the probability of graduating. To account for grade variations between the programs, GPA is standardized by program.
To have a correct estimation of 𝛽 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘 using Ordinary Least Squares, it is required that 𝐶𝑂𝑉[(𝜖, 𝑅)|𝑓(𝑆11), 𝑋, 𝐹𝐸] = 0 or conditional independence. This is possible by the inclusion of fixed effects (FE) and the function 𝑓(𝑆11 𝑖𝑐𝑠,𝑡0 ), which attenuate any possible bias. 𝑓(𝑆11 𝑖𝑐𝑠,𝑡0 )
captures observed and unobserved variables that directly affect high-school performance and influence post-secondary studies, such as ability and motivation towards study. Another concern with this framework is related to peer effects: good students who come from bad high schools, and thus are negatively affected by low performing peers, could inflate the estimated effects of rankings when they have a good performance in college. Murphy and Weinhardt (2020) using Montecarlo simulations show that controlling for school and time fixed effects serve to attenuate this bias. Further, it is worth mentioning that after controlling for the unobserved characteristics included in 𝑓(𝑆11), 𝜖 𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑝,𝑡 and 𝑅 𝑖𝑐𝑠,𝑡0 are determined in different periods of time, the first in college and the second in high school, which adds to the argument of conditional independence.
Rankings are calculated based on the overall results for Saber 11 for each individual in her respective high school cohort following the standard in the literature:
where 𝑛 𝑖𝑐𝑠 is the ascending ordinal rank of individual 𝑖, who went to high school 𝑠 in the cohort 𝑐, and 𝑁 𝑐𝑠 is the total number of students in her high-school cohort. For example, if a student to equation (1) for the first approach is the introduction of a polynomial of GPA in the first semester to control for ability, and the use of separate regressions by groups of rankings based on the GPA obtained in the first semester of college (𝟙GPA icp 1st.sem ). In equation 3.2B, the variables of interest are the set composed by two categorical variables for high school rankings and college rankings (that take 3 possible values) and their interaction terms. For equation
(3.2B), the goal is to analyze whether there are different effects between students that were at the top of high school rankings versus those who were at the bottom, conditional on the same level of performance in college (i.e., 𝟙𝑅 𝑖𝑐𝑝 1𝑠𝑡.𝑠𝑒𝑚 = high). If the effects are not significantly different from zero, we can conclude that changes in rankings do not have any impact on the outcome variables analyzed. y icsp,t = 𝛃 𝐫𝐚𝐧𝐤 𝐑 𝐢𝐜𝐬,𝐭𝟎 𝐒𝟏𝟏 + Γ 1 f(S11 ics,t0 ) + Γ 2 𝑓(GPA icp,t0 1st.sem ) + θX i,t0 + δ c + η s + ζ p + ϵ icps,t 𝑖𝑓 𝟙GPA icp 1st.sem = 𝑙, ∀ 𝑙 = 1,2,3 (3.2A) y icsp,t = Β𝟙𝑹 𝒊𝒄𝒑,𝒕𝟎 𝑺𝟏𝟏 ##𝟙𝑹 𝒊𝒄𝒑,𝒕𝟎 𝟏𝒔𝒕.𝒔𝒆𝒎 + Γ 1 f(S11 ics,t0 ) + Γ 2 𝑓(GPA icp,t0 1st.sem ) + θX i,t0 + δ c + η s + ζ p + ϵ icps,t (3.2B) Similarly, to analyze the existing tradeoff between studying with high-performing peers and ranking effects, equation (3.1) is modified by substituting rankings as the variable of interest by a categorical variable 𝐶 𝑝 that measures the competitiveness of each cohort by academic program p. The level of competitiveness is constructed based on the cohort averages for GPA in the first semester of college, Saber 11 scores, and the entrance exam scores. A competitive cohort is defined as the one with one of the highest average values and 80 th percentiles in the previous three variables 59 . Equation (3.3) describes the procedure used. Here, the effects of enrolling in a competitive (𝐶 𝑝 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ ) or non-competitive cohort (𝐶 𝑝 𝐿𝑜𝑤 ) are calculated for the performance groups based on the GPA in the first semester of college (𝟙𝑅 𝑖𝑐𝑝 1𝑠𝑡.𝑠𝑒𝑚 ) described in the previous section (low, middle, high). The goal is thus to compare students with similar characteristics in terms of academic performance who enroll in the university with a highly competitive cohort or a noncompetitive cohort. y icsp,t = 𝑪 𝒑,𝒕𝟎 + Γ 1 f(S11 ics,t0 ) + Γ 2 𝑓(GPA icp,t0 1st.sem ) + θX i,t0 + δ c + η s + ζ p + ϵ icps,t 𝑖𝑓 𝟙𝑅 𝑖𝑐𝑝 1𝑠𝑡.𝑠𝑒𝑚 = 𝑙, ∀ 𝑙 = 1,2,3 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑪 𝒑 = 𝐶 𝑝 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ , 𝐶 𝑝 𝐿𝑜𝑤 𝟙 (3.3)
It is important to highlight that the definition of competitiveness for this study is based on the three variables mentioned previously. This definition intends to capture not only the general knowledge, innate ability, and the skills of students at taking exams, as measured by the scores on Saber 11 and the entrance exam, but also other traits that determine the success of students in college, such as perseverance, motivation, discipline, and effort, which can be captured by the GPA in the first semester. Because this study focuses on the information that students receive regarding their relative performance, students must be aware if their peers are on average of the high-performing or low-performing type. In the case of college performance, this information is provided mainly by the grades students receive in college, rather than the exams that students took prior to enrolling in college. For example, if the students who obtained the highest scores on the entrance exam have average grades in college, it is likely that other students do not perceive them 59 The procedure to calculate a competitive and non-competitive cohort is as follows. First calculate the mean and 80 th percentile for GPA, Saber 11, and the entrance exam scores for each cohort in each academic program. The scores on the entrance exam and Saber 11 are standardized by semester to account for changes in the exams. For GPA the mean is substituted by the median to account for outliers. Then, by program, calculate the 70th and 30th percentile cutoffs for both the mean values (median for the GPA) and the 80 th percentiles. The cohorts that are above the 70% percentile for both the mean and 80 th percentiles are classified as competitive, whereas those below the 30 th percentiles are labelled as non-competitive. The remaining cohorts act as the comparison group. For the analysis of competitive (noncompetitive) cohorts, non-competitive (competitive) cohorts were excluded.
as outstanding students. As a robustness check, this study includes a variation in the definition of competitiveness that excludes the GPA in the first semester. Additionally, the scores on the entrance exam and Saber 11 are standardized by year. This procedure is performed as there have been modifications in both exams, such that the averages in the most recent years are generally higher. In this way, a competitive cohort could be interpreted as the cohorts in program p that enroll on average students with a high performance on the entrance exam and Saber 11, relative to the pool of admitted students in the university each year (including all programs), and whose students have a median GPA in the first semester that is historically high.
The university classifies students as being on academic probation if they: i) obtained a GPA lower than 2.8 in the first semester; ii) for any other semester, if their cumulative GPA is below 3.0. Recall that 3.0 is the passing grade for every course. Similarly, students receive outstanding performances when they fulfil the following conditions: i) the semester's GPA is 4.0 or higher, ii) they pass all courses in which they were enrolled. The 2.8 cutoff makes it possible to use a sharp regression discontinuity design (RD) to evaluate whether students who fall above and below the cutoffs experience different educational outcomes in college. This empirical strategy is designed to address objective 3 by focusing on students who experienced a similar performance level in college. For this purpose and in line with the previous sections, only the first semester will be considered for the construction of the cutoffs, whereas the remaining semesters will be used for analyzing the performance of students in college 60 . The average local effect (𝜏 𝑆𝑅𝐷 ) is described in equation (3.4), where c is the cutoff value and ∈ is any number that determines the range of students after 4 years of enrollment have fewer observations than those calculated for the first year of enrollment.
Overall, higher rankings in high school are correlated with more desirable outcomes in college, independently of students' performance in the first semester of college. While some of the estimations are not significantly different from zero, there seem to be specific trends depending on the segment of the distribution of college performance. In this sense, higher high school rankings are correlated to higher GPAs in college, but the effect is only significant at the top of the distribution of college performance in the first semester (group high) and after two and four years of enrollment. The maximum average effect ranges between 0.25 to 0.30 point increases in GPA, which is equivalent to multiplying the estimated coefficient by the range of the rankings (1, as the lowest and highest rankings are 0 and 1 respectively). This means that there are only significant and positive effects on GPA for those students who were at the top of their cohorts in high school and continued being at the top in college (figure 3.2a). Similarly, higher rankings in high school are correlated with students enrolling in (and earning) more credits, but these effects are only significant for the second semester of college and for those students who had the highest GPAs in the first semester (figures 3.2b and 3.2c). There are two potential explanations for this outcome:
students who obtain GPAs higher than 4.0 and earn all credits are allowed to enroll for more credits, and students who obtained the relatively highest GPAs in the first semester are less likely to withdraw credits, as withdrawn credits are not counted as enrolled credits.
At the bottom of the performance in the first semester of college (low group), students with higher high school rankings are less likely to be expelled and on average less likely to fail credits 2 and 4 years after they enrolled in college (figures 3.2d and 3.2e), although the latter effect is not significantly different from zero. The former result could be read as students who were at the top of their cohorts in high school (and have a ranking of 1) are 16% less likely to be expelled than students who were at the bottom (ranking equals 0). Interestingly, students with higher rankings are more likely to switch programs, and this effect is more significant for the high and low groups.
Two conclusions can be inferred from this section. First, changes in rankings do not seem to have any significant correlation with different college outcomes. Students who came from being at the top of their classes in high school to the bottom in the first semester of college are not particularly discouraged, which could lead them to lower college outcomes. In fact, the results seem to point in the opposite direction: they are less likely to be expelled relative to students with lower high school rankings. Similarly, albeit not significant, students with higher high school rankings and relatively low performance in the first semester of college have on average higher GPAs and credits earned in the following semesters. Second, these results are in line with the long-lasting effects of students' rankings in secondary education on college outcomes (and even post-college outcomes) analyzed in other settings (Elsner & Isphording, 2017; Murphy & Weinhardt, 2020) .
The results obtained by using high school rankings as a categorical variable that takes only three levels (low, medium, high) instead of a continuous variable are similar. Table 3 .2 compares students classified in the highest group versus the lowest group based on high school rankings for two levels of performance in the first semester of college: high and low. The results corroborate that for GPA and credits earned the effects of high school rankings are only significant for the college group high. Likewise, this table shows two additional results. Conditional on having a high performance in the first semester of college, students with the highest rankings in high school (group high) are 3.3% more likely to graduate from college than students with the lowest rankings (group low). On the other hand, conditional on having low performance in the first semester of college, students with higher rankings in high school are 3.2% more likely to receive a semester with academic probation relative to students with the lowest rankings in high school. The latter is perhaps the only result that shows negative effects of having higher high school rankings on college outcomes.
The results (see figure 3 .3) show that enrolling in more competitive cohorts, as measured by the median GPA and the average scores on Saber 11 and the entrance exam, leads to lower (and significant) GPAs, but only for the high group. While the pattern is similar for the middle group, the effects are only statistically different from zero in the fourth year. In this sense, GPA decreases by around 0.15 points after one, two, and four years of enrollment in college. On the other hand, enrolling in noncompetitive cohorts only has significant (and negative) effects for the group high after four years. Students in more competitive cohorts earn around 1 credit less after one year and 2.5 credits after two years, and this effect is significant for all groups. This result could be explained by students in more competitive cohorts enrolling in fewer (or withdrawing from more) credits. For the noncompetitive cohorts, the results are small or not statistically different from zero.
Coupled with the previous results, middle or low students tend to fail more credits in competitive courses, while the same is true for high students but in noncompetitive cohorts. Nonetheless, the effects are small, as the highest effect is 1 credit after 2 years, and they are highly volatile for the 3 groups across the different years. As a reference, usually 2 to 3 hours-a-week courses have 2 credits, and 4 to 6 hours-a-week courses have either 3 or 4 credits. Regarding other variables not disaggregated by time, middle students in the most competitive cohorts are 3% more likely to be expelled and 6% less likely to graduate. Similarly, students in the high group in competitive cohorts are 6% less likely to receive an outstanding semester. On the other hand, in noncompetitive cohorts, high students are 3% less likely to graduate and low students 4% more likely to do so. Note that high students in noncompetitive cohorts, as it also happens in competitive cohorts, are less likely to obtain an outstanding semester. Although the same outcome, the potential explanations could vary. for noncompetitive cohorts it could indicate that the high students are not as knowledgeable as those from other cohorts, whereas for the competitive cohorts this could be explained by the negative effects of having high-performing peers in the classroom, which were described in the introduction, and professors being more demanding with more competitive students. Unfortunately, it is not possible to disentangle any of these channels. 63
Receiving an academic probation in the first semester does not seem to have any significant effect on the college outcomes analyzed, except for the probability of an academic probation later in college. As explained previously, an academic probation in the first semester does not impose any limits on students regarding the credits in which they can enroll, nor does it require students to take remedial courses, stop them from receiving any financial aid, or require them to increase their GPA any differently from other students with similar performance in the first semester. As such, academic probation acts mainly as a source of information that students are preforming below the expectations. In this sense, students who receive an academic probation in the first semester are around 15% less likely to receive an academic probation later in college relative to 63 The effects calculated after excluding GPA in the first from the definition of competitiveness are generally not statistically different from zero. In some cases, these effects have the opposite sign, such as GPA for the high group.
The results are presented in the figure C.2. Thus, the definition of competitiveness can affect the results.
students whose GPA in the first semester was slightly above the academic probation cutoff 64 . The effects are similar for men and women. Nonetheless, women tend to have better performance than men and are less likely to receive (or be close to receiving) an academic probation. Therefore, the estimations for women have higher variance and are not usually significantly different from zero (see table 3 .3 and figure 3.4). As a robustness check, figure 3.5 shows the likelihood of receiving an academic probation by changing the cutoff in increases of 0.1 GPA points. The estimated effects are not different from zero for other cutoff values. Overall, while students who received an academic probation in the first semester are less likely to be in academic probation later in college, this result does not translate into better academic performance 65 .
This study addresses three questions related to ranking effects. First, whether students who were at the top of their classes in high school react in the same way as average (or bottom-ranked) students when both experience low (or high) performance in the first semester if college; second, whether enrolling in the most and least competitive cohorts by program translates into differential outcomes for students; and third, whether students who receive an academic probation in the first semester, which acts only as a message to improve their performance in college, obtain better outcomes in the following semesters. For these three objectives, this study analyzes various outcomes in college measured at different times.
64 Two notes about this result. First, the running variable (GPA in the first semester) does not exhibit any jumps close to the academic probation cutoff (see figure C.1), which indicates that self-selection is not an issue. However, there is a significant jump around 2.5, which is the cutoff for dismissals. Because students who are expelled cannot study at the university for 5 years, it is likely that students take actions to remain in college. Second, students usually receive academic probation between the second and fourth semesters. 65 The cutoff for obtaining an outstanding semester in the first semester of college was also used. None of the estimations for this analysis were statistically significant.
The estimations show that students with higher high school rankings obtain on average better outcomes in college. This result could be interpreted as evidence that changes in rankings are not relevant for students. It also points to the long-lasting effects of high school rankings to explain academic results in college and the importance of considering such rankings to help detect the students who are more prone to be expelled or switch programs. Thus, it is not surprising that universities around the world use high school rankings for admission purposes. Students enrolled in more competitive cohorts, as measured by the average scores on the college entrance exam, the national standardized tests, and the median GPA in the first semester, exhibit worse college outcomes than any other cohort, particularly in terms of GPA, and credits earned and failed. On the other hand, the educational outcomes for students enrolled in noncompetitive cohorts are usually not different from any other cohort. Although it is not possible to disentangle whether this effect is explained by the tradeoff between better peers and ranking effects, or simply by professors being more demanding when students seem more knowledgeable, identifying which cohorts are more (or less) competitive could provide valuable information to colleges. Additionally, the fact that more competitive cohorts have negative effects only on the top students, such as in the case of GPA, and not on the other groups could suggest that the tradeoff between high-performing peers and ranking effects varies by group. In this way, students who struggle in college could benefit from high performing peers in their classes, but high performing peers do not see benefits, at least in terms of grades or credits, from studying in more competitive cohorts. Nonetheless, further research is necessary to draw definitive conclusions, especially when the definition of competitiveness affects the results.
GPAs or credits. However, it is less likely that students who receive an academic probation in the first semester obtain another academic probation. If the purpose of academic probation is to inform students that their performance falls below the minimum expectations, so they can achieve significant improvements, universities should evaluate whether this information is meaningful to students and evaluate ways to improve this communication. Otherwise, these types of messages act more like administrative classifications of students rather than mechanisms that encourage students to improve. This research should encourage institutions, particularly the one analyzed here, to use different rankings and the competitiveness of the cohorts to identify dynamics in college.
There are many potential research lines derived from this study. Related to changes in rankings, future research can explore how students react to the information received by rankings.
For example, how students perceive themselves at the beginning of college and how this perception changes through college. At the same time, how these changes relate to effort, motivation, and other perceptions that students have about their programs and themselves. Similarly, the study could be enriched with course-by-course information. This information can provide a more accurate comparison between students, as it is possible to determine whether students are enrolled in the same courses. It could also be useful to analyze other aspects related to expectations, such as whether students who perceived themselves as good in math before enrolling in college are more likely to drop out or change programs when they struggle in math during college. It is worth highlighting that the effects of high school rankings estimated here stem from two assumptions: that students know (but not accurately) their relative performance and that the national standardized tests taken at the end of high school (Saber 11) provide the best indicator to measure high school performance. Although this test measures basic knowledge in different areas, it is not a direct measure of skills such as effort or discipline, which could play a major role in college. compares the effects for students with the highest high school rankings (between 0.85 and 1) versus those who had relatively low high-school rankings (less than 0.5) for two different levels of performance in the first semester of college based on their GPA: low (first tercile) and high (last tercile). Diff-𝛽 values close to zero indicate that there are no differences between students with the highest and lowest high-school rankings, which is corroborated with a t-statistic (null hypothesis is that the effects for both groups are the same). This table derives from equation 3.2B. Notes: Estimations are based on splitting rankings into bins of size 0.1. c) Credits enrolled d) Credits failed Figure 3.3: Comparison between competitive and non-competitive cohorts with the rest of the cohorts a) GPA b) Credits earned c) Credits enrolled d) Credits failed 145 Figure 3.3 (cont.): Comparison between competitive and non-competitive cohorts with the rest of the cohorts e) Other variables not disaggregated by time (probabilities) Notes: These graphs show the 𝛽 coefficients of enrolling in a competitive cohort (or non-competitive cohort) based on equation 3, using separate regressions depending on the performance of students in the first semester of college (low, middle, high). For the variables GPA and credits, the coefficients are calculated at different points in time. For the calculation of competitive (non-competitive) cohorts, non-competitive(competitive) cohorts were excluded. Significance levels: * p<.05; ** p<.01; *** p<.001 Notes: Only for students who remained in the university for 3 or more semesters. Bandwidth is 0.2, close to the optimal bandwidth calculated using MSE. a) Soybean production b) Machinery and investments Figure B.3: Graphic effects of the expansion on formal jobs Ai) Aii) Bi) Bii)
Notes: The confidence intervals are estimated using a T distribution with 1000 observations, which provides a lower bound, as the sample cells are usually larger than this value. Sant'Anna and Zhao (2020) use a normal approximation to construct the confidence intervals. The estimations only use the age groups 6 to 15. More disaggregated groups hinder the IPW convergence, resulting in unusable estimations.
Notes: The estimations are weighted by the population in each municipality.
Notes
In fact, the strategy used by Balboni et al. (2022) is based on the empirical result that household below a certain level of wealth (poverty trap cutoff) were experiencing asset deaccumulation.
The dataset includes a total of 26,965 households at the baseline, including both eligible and non-eligible.
The exclusion criteria are: 1. The household is borrowing from a microcredit NGO. 2. The household is currently receiving government or non-government benefits. 3. There are no adult women in the household physically able to use the transferred assets. The inclusion criteria are 1. Own less than 10 decimals of land. 2. No adult male income earner in household. 3. School-age children working.
Women working outside the household.
No productive assets.
The results show that out of 1,246 observations with "traditional expectations" from mothers, 1,057 (84.8%) are also "traditional" according to fathers. Similarly, for aspirational expectations, this ratio is 1,010 out of 1,253 (80.6%). The main differences are "other" with 357 out of
(62.4%), and "don't know" with only 52%.
Some variables have missing values, which reduces the sample size for each estimation. As we have different specifications that do not use the same set of covariates, we prefer to lose some observations in each estimation rather than reducing the total sample size.
From an initial sample of around 8,400 households, 2.66% have changes in the reported gender, 5.63% abnormal changes in age, and 0.74% had a different respondent. In total, around
7.15% of the sample was removed.7 An important variation for the models is when the unit of observation is not the child but the household. In these cases, we restrict the set of covariates to only the age of the main female respondent (mother), her years of education, the household size, and the level of wealth in the household. Additionally, to calculate the effects of the intervention on enrollment and drop-out rates, we use the status of enrollment but only at the baseline as a covariate.
The variables order of birth, the number of siblings younger than 15, and having an older sibling from the opposite gender are included to account for the potential preference of parents towards boys. In this way, ultra-poor families might be tempted to underinvest in girls' education when these girls have younger brothers. Similarly, the presence of older brothers in the household who can work for a wage can alleviate the financial burden of the household and allow parents to have more resources to invest in the future of their daughters.
Estimated using data from the Federal reserve of Saint Louis: https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/PPPTTLBDA618NUPN
These percentages include both treatment and control groups. For the treatment group, these values are 57%, 39%, and 35% for the baseline, and two follow-ups respectively. For the control group, they are 61%, 49%, and 51% respectively. Note that the largest gap between the two groups occurs after the baseline.
It is important to highlight that according to Kabeer (2019) , the levels of happiness only increased for the first follow-up but disappeared for the second follow-up. The author finds the same pattern for stress levels.
Sulaiman (2015) shows that the intervention did not have any significant effects on the time children allocate to household chores, independently of the age group and gender. Similarly, the author shows that the largest increases in income generating activities for children come from livestock. Therefore, it is also unlikely that children took some of their parents' tasks. In our estimations, we find that mothers decreased the time allocated to other activities (by
These topics are child marriage, marriage registration and its implications, dowry, human trafficking, disaster management, early childhood education, family planning, daily food habits and healthy nutrition, vitamin consumption, disease prevention and care, de-worming education and practice, and immunization (Dharmadasa et al., 2015)
The political awareness index is composed of the questions that measure whether participants are aware of the legal age of marriage for boys and girls, the legal punishment against dowry, legal system of divorce, and voting age. Additionally, it includes 4 questions about knowing the name of certain politicians (at least one ward member, at least one member of the parliament in the area, the prime minister, and the president).
The 12 groups included are: cereals; roots and tubers; vegetables; fruits; meat, poultry, and offal; eggs; fish and seafood; pulses, legumes, and nuts; milk and milk products; oils and fats; sugar or honey; and miscellaneous.
We also analyzed housewives as a separate category and independent from agricultural labor. The results remained similar. This result is expected as "housewives" is the main occupation within traditional occupations for girls.
According to the new Brazilian Forest Code (Law No. 12.651/2012), each rural property should preserve a percent of the forest area (20% in areas of Cerrado, 80% in the Amazon rainforest). Thus, as Polizel et al. (2021) suggest, this code has had significant effects to protect the ecosystems in the Amazon, but the process of deforestation is still large in frontier areas such as Matopiba (see definition below).
These rates include all economic sectors. For more information, seeIBGE (2012). It is worth mentioning that the country has also experienced some improvements in formal jobs. According to calculations from IBGE based on the 2017 Agricultural Census, formal employment in the private sector reached 50.3% and 52.0% in the states of Maranhão and Piauí respectively, which are relatively low relative to the national average of 74.3%. Overall, all the states included in the analysis, except for Mato Grosso, are below the national average. In this sense, there is still space for improvements. See: https://censoagro2017.ibge.gov.br/en/2185-news-agency/releases-en/25218-quarterly-continuous-pnadunemployment-decreases-in-10-of-the-27-federation-units-in-q2-2019.html
Additionally, major agricultural companies such as Cargill, Bunge, ADM, SLC Agrícola, and Amaggi operate in the area and offer formal jobs, which contrasts with small producers who do not necessarily offer formal employment.
Another solution is to use the Minimum Comparable Areas (or AMC) proposed by Ehrl (2017) to aggregate municipalities between 1872 and 2010. In Brazil, the number of municipalities has increased significantly. According to IBGE, there were 4,491 municipalities in 1991. This number increased to 5,507 in 2000 and 5,565 in 2010.
We selected this cutoff to guarantee a significant group of "treated" municipalities to include in the sample. Out of the more than 1,600 municipalities in the region of analysis, only 582 had some production of soybeans in 2018. Of this last group, a production of 60,000 tons is equivalent to the 70 th percentile. This cutoff also requires areas of production close to 20,000 hectares, as the yield in the region is slightly above 3 tons/hectare. This requirement excludes around 5% of the municipalities, whose surface areas are smaller than the minimum required. As we describe later in the methodology, we also estimate the effects for the largest producers only, as well as for the municipalities for which we would expect the largest effects. In this sense, the latter estimations provide an upper bound to our analysis.
Ben-Michael et al (2022) introduce covariates Z in a second step. A simple way to modify the equations to introduce covariates is by substituting 𝑌 𝑗 by 𝑋 𝑗 , such that 𝑋 𝑗 = (𝑍 𝑗 , 𝑌 𝑗 )
Xu (2017) recommends the use of the parametric over the nonparametric bootstrap when the treated sample is smaller than 40 units.
Note that the penalization parameter used by Ben Michael et al. (2022) addresses this problem, as the counterfactual is forced to rely on the weights of more control units, instead of only a few. Thus, this adjustment reduces the bias in the estimations if for example one of these units experiences a large shock.
Metropoli (1A, 1B, 1C), Regional Capital (2A, 2B, 2C), Sub-regional Center (3A, 3B), zonal center (4A, 4B), and local center (5). Most of the municipalities are labelled as local centers.
All monetary variables are deflated using the Consumer Price Index (CPI), with 2010 as the base year.
This program was introduced in the 1990s, and it is the most important program in the country to incentivize agricultural family production. The program is open to any type of production, not only soybeans. It considers three types of funding: production, infrastructure and municipal services, and training (Junqueira & de Lima, 2008) . Brazilian policymakers recognize family farmers as households whose land sizes vary from 5 to 110 hectares, depending on the locality, use family labor as the main input, and their income comes predominantly from agricultural activities. All funded projects by Pronaf must comply with environmental regulations. In case of infringements, farmers might lose access to credit in the future. In line with the environmental regulations, the program excludes households living in environmentally risky areas, such as in the Caatinga biome (Zeller & Schiesari, 2020) . Pronaf also targets farmers with different socioeconomic levels. In this way, it is designed to include family farmers classified in Group A (farmers settled by the land reform), Group B (farmers who live below the poverty line), and Group V (farmers with high income levels). Additional requirements include: i) obtaining at least 50% of the family's gross income from the farm, ii) a gross family income of no more than to R$500,000 (Reais) in the last 12 (around US$93,000), iii) permanent employees must be no greater than the number of family members employed in the farm.
The information from IBGE does not include the produced value for livestock for each municipality (only by state). We impute this value following the methodology proposed by the Brazilian Institute of Agricultural Economics (IEA), described on "Valor da Produção Agropecuária: a geografia da agricultura e da pecuária brasileira em 2012" http://www.iea.sp.gov.br/ftpiea/AIA/AIA-64-2014.pdf. This imputation is performed by multiplying the proportion of heads of livestock in each municipality relative to the total heads in the state by the price of meat (in Kg) produced in Brazil. This procedure is done by year. All values were deflated using the CPI for 2010.
Different from SCM, Panel data with Fixed Effects estimations do not meet the necessary conditions to interpret the results as causal. Thus, the control group is not equivalent to the treatment group in the absence of the treatment. This means that even though the estimations using Panel data include causal effects, these effects are contaminated by differences in unobserved characteristics and differences in trends.
In this study, the terms more (or less) competitive cohorts and cohorts with higher (lower) performing students are used interchangeably.
In a similar way, Elsner and Isphording (2018) show that involving in risky behaviors is less likely for girls than boys with higher rankings.
This exam resembles the SAT or ACT exams in the United States based on the types of questions and its main purpose (college admission)
Some students are exempted from taking the entrance exam when they achieve outstanding performance on the national standardized tests. Some examples are beneficiaries from Ser Pilo Paga, Distinción Andrés Bello, etc.
Students can apply to a second program. Admissions are only granted if the available spots are not filled with students who chose the program as their first option. Therefore, programs where students are admitted as their second option are not highly demanded.
The same exercise was also conducted using the 4.0 cutoff for an outstanding semester. The estimations do not show significant results for any of the outcome variables. For this reason, they are not presented here.
Notes: The number of observations includes the baseline and the two follow-ups