Introduction
"Targeting the Ultra Poor" Program
Targeting
Program Components
Conceptual Framework
Data Description
Poverty and Informal Transfers at Baseline
Randomization and Balancing at Baseline
Empirical Analysis
Estimation
Effects on the Level of Informal Transfers
Matching in Transfer Networks
Effects on Reciprocity of Informal Transfers
Discussion
Outside-village Transfers
Mechanisms
Comparison of Magnitudes
Conclusion
APPENDIX: POVERTY ALLEVIATION AND INTERHOUSEHOLD TRANSFERS: EVIDENCE FROM BRAC'S GRADUATION PROGRAM IN BANGLADESH
Selim Gulesci
S1: Additional Tables
Notes:
Notes:
S2: Comparison of Midline vs. Endline Impacts
Figure 1 :
Table 1 :
Table 2 :
Table 3 :
Table 4 :
Table 5 :
Table 6 :
Table 7 :
Table 8 :
Table 9 :
Figure 1: BRAC's Ultra-poor Graduation Program -Timeline
COMPARISON OF SOCIO-ECONOMIC CLASSES AT BASELINE
MATCHING IN TRANSFER NETWORKS AT BASELINEPanel A gives the percentage of households receiving transfers from the relevant group; Panel B gives the percentage of households giving transfers to the relevant group. The four rows within Panel A (B) show the percentage of respondents whose household received (gave) any transfers to an ultra-poor (other poor, middle class or upper class) in their village. Equality of means across the four wealth classes are all rejected at 99% confidence (based on one-sided t-tests).
EFFECTS ON INFORMAL TRANSFERS OF ULTRA-POOR HOUSEHOLDSThe table reports ITT estimates based on specification (1) estimated with OLS. The sample includes observations from ultra-poor households surveyed at the midline and endline surveys. All specifications control for the baseline level of the outcome, survey wave and subdistrict (strata) fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the BRAC branch office level (unit of randomization). All monetary values are measured in Bangladeshi Takas, deflated to 2007 prices using the annual CPI index published by the Bank of Bangladesh. In 2007, 1USD=69BDT nominal and 1USD=18.5BDT at PPP. *** (**) (*) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) (10%) level. The dependent variable in Panel A, column 1 is a dummy variable (DV) equal to 1 if the respondent's household received any transfers (in cash or in kind) from another household during the 12 months preceding the survey; in column 2 it is the monetary value of transfers received during the past 12 months; in column 3 it is a DV equal to 1 if the respondent's household gave any transfers to another household during the past 12 months; in column 4 it is the monetary value of all transfers given by the respondent's household during the last 12 months; in column 5 it is a DV equal to 1 if the respondent's household was a net transfer receiver in the past 12 months; in column 6 it is the monetary value of transfers received minus transfers made by the respondent's household in the past 12 months. All dependent variables in Panel B (C) are identical to those in Panel A, except they refer to within (outside) village transfers.
EFFECTS ON FOOD TRANSFERS OF ULTRA-POOR HOUSEHOLDSThe table reports ITT estimates based on specification (1) estimated with OLS. The sample includes observations from ultra-poor households surveyed at the midline and endline surveys. All specifications control for the baseline level of the outcome, survey wave and subdistrict (strata) fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the BRAC branch office level (unit of ran-
EFFECTS ON MATCHING IN TRANSFER NETWORKSIn Panel A, the dependent variables in columns 1, 2, 3 and 4 are dummy variables equal to 1 if the respondent reported that her household received any transfers from any ultra-poor, other poor, middle class or upper class households (within her community) respectively. In Panel B, the dependent variables in columns 1, 2, 3 and 4 are dummy variables equal to 1 if the respondent reported that her household gave any transfers to any ultra-poor, other poor, middle class or upper class households (within her community) respectively.
EFFECTS ON MATCHING IN TRANSFER NETWORKS, REPORTED BY NON-
LONG-RUN EFFECTS ON MATCHING IN TRANSFERSThe table reports ITT estimates based on specification (1) estimated with OLS. The sample includes observations from the long-run followup survey (2014). All specifications control for subdistrict (strata) fixed effects, and the pre-treatment level of the outcome as reported (retrospectively) in the 2014 survey. Standard errors are clustered at the BRAC branch office level (unit of randomization). *** (**) (*) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) (10%) level. The dependent variable in column 1 is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent's household gave any transfers or loans to any ultra-poor household in her village. The dependent variable in column 2 is the fraction of ultra-poor households living in the respondent's village who received transfers or loans from the respondent's household, multiplied by 100 (so that the effects correspond to percentage points).
EFFECTS ON RECIPROCITY OF ULTRA-POOR'S TRANSFERS
EFFECTS ON TRANSFERS FROM EMPLOYERS
In rural parts of developing countries, individuals are faced with substantial risks and often rely on transfers from their social networks for consumption-smoothing (Rosenzweig (1988) , Udry (1994) ); yet there is limited evidence on how large-scale antipoverty programs affect interhousehold transfers. This paper provides evidence on the causal effect of a large-scale poverty alleviation program on informal transfers within rural Bangladeshi communities. Implemented by the NGO BRAC, "Targeting the Ultra Poor" program (henceforth "the program") targets the poorest households in rural communities in Bangladesh and provides them with a transfer of productive assets, training and other support services. Bandiera et al. (2017) show that the program leads to long-run improvements in the socio-economic conditions of beneficiary households. Similar programs targeting ultra-poor households have been evaluated in other contexts and, by and large, have found positive effects on socio-economic conditions of the targeted households (Banerjee et al. (2015 (Banerjee et al. ( , 2016 (Banerjee et al. ( , 2018)) , Blattman et al. (2016) , Collins and Ligon (2017) ); but to date, we have limited evidence on these programs' effects on informal transfers. In this paper, I exploit the randomized roll-out of the program and panel data covering over 21,000 households over seven years to study the program's effects on interhousehold transfers. * Selim Gulesci is Associate Professor at Trinity College Dublin, his email address is: gulescis@tcd.ie. The author thanks the editor (Eric Edmonds) and three anonymous referees for comments that improved the paper; Oriana Bandiera, Tim Besley, Robin Burgess, Maitreesh Ghatak, Imran Matin, Imran Rasul and Munshi Sulaiman for their support and advice throughout the project; Yann Bramoullé, Greg Fischer, Eliana La Ferrara, Rohini Pande, Jean-Phillipe Platteau for helpful discussions; seminar participants at Aix-Marseille, Bocconi, EBRD, Edinburgh, IFS, George Washington, Koc, LSE-UCL, Namur, Sabanci, Uppsala, Vanderbilt and Wharton for their comments. The usual disclaimer applies. This document is an output from research funding by the UK Department for International Development (DFID) as part of the iiG, a research programme to study how to improve institutions for pro-poor growth in Africa and South-Asia. The views expressed are not necessarily those of DFID. Support from the Bagri Fellowship is gratefully acknowledged. Previous versions of this paper were circulated with the titles "Labor-tying and Poverty in a Rural Economy" and "Poverty and Interlinkage in Rural Labor Markets".
In order to evaluate the effects of the program, potential beneficiary households (henceforth referred as the "ultra-poor") were identified by the program in 40 BRAC branch offices covering 1,309 villages. Within every village, BRAC conducted participatory wealth appraisals whereby community members assigned a wealth class for each household: poor, middle or upper class. Following this community appraisal, BRAC program officers identified eligible "ultra-poor" households among the poor. 1 A baseline survey was conducted on all of the ultra-poor households, as well as a representative sample of the rest of the community. Importantly, the survey included questions on informal transfer networks of respondents' households. Using the baseline village census, the identity of any household with whom the respondent's household interacted within the village was recorded. After the baseline survey, the program was randomly introduced in 20 branch offices in 2007, and the other 20 remained as controls until 2011. The same sample of households were re-surveyed in 2009 and 2011, after which the control communities were also treated. An additional followup survey was conducted in 2014, that is seven years after the baseline and three years after the control branches had also been treated, and I will use this data to examine long-run trends of outcomes for early versus late treated ultra-poor households. I find that the program crowded-out informal transfers received by the ultra-poor households in treatment villages, but this was driven mainly by outside-village transfers. The ultra-poor in treatment villages were 13 percentage points (ppt) less likely to have received informal transfers (during the 12 months preceding the survey) relative to the control group, while the effect on the intensive margin is imprecisely estimated. When I disaggregate the transfers by location, I find that they were 4ppt less likely to have received transfers from within their village but the value of transfers received were 29% higher relative to the control group. Moreover, they were more likely to report receiving food transfers from other households within the village. On the other hand, outside village transfers were crowded out by 12ppt on the extensive margin and 23% in value.
Examining who the ultra-poor households exchange transfers with, I find that the program increased their likelihood to receive as well as give transfers from/to wealthier households within their village. Here, as a proxy for wealth, I use the socio-economic wealth rank assigned to each household at baseline, during the community wealth appraisal. I find that, after the program, the likelihood that the ultra-poor in treatment villages give transfers to other poor, middle and upper class households increased. Moreover, middle and upper class households were more likely to report giving transfers to the ultra-poor in their communities, and this effect is maintained seven years af-ter the baseline. As a result of these changes, the reciprocity of ultra-poor households' transfer arrangements with higher socio-economic classes increased significantly. In particular, the reciprocity of ultra-poor households' transfer links with middle class households increased by 9ppt (19% relative to control) and by 12ppt (44%) with upper class households.
Finally, I find that the program reduced the likelihood that ultra-poor households receive transfers from their employers. Ultra-poor households in treatment communities were 4ppt less likely to report an employer as a source of transfers -a large effect considering that in the control group only 9% of ultra-poor households reported an employer as a source of transfers. To understand whether this effect was driven by a general shift away from wage-labor I restrict the sample to ultra-poor households who were engaged in wage-employment at baseline as well as at the two followup surveys; and I find that they were also less likely to receive transfers from their employers. While this analysis has a caveat (since it is based on a selected subsample), it nevertheless suggests that the effect is not only due to a shift away from wage employment. Overall, the findings suggest that there may be a causal relationship between poverty and alternative forms of reciprocity in informal insurance networks: poor households may reciprocate transfers from wealthier members of the community by selling their labor cheaply to them; while less poor households may reciprocate with transfers of their own. The paper contributes to the literature on informal insurance in village economies in a number of ways. First, it is related to the literature on risk-sharing through reciprocal transfers (Townsend 1994 , Udry 1994) . This literature has demonstrated that risksharing networks are likely to be concentrated along dimensions of proximity such as kinship, caste or geographic proximity. 2 What has been less studied is whether poverty has a causal effect on who agents are matched with in risk-sharing networks. Previous empirical studies have exploited cross-sectional variation or lab experiments to shed light on this. 3 This paper contributes to the literature by showing that an ex-ogenous improvement in the socio-economic statuses of the poorest households in a village (caused by an antipoverty program) increases their engagement in reciprocated transfers with wealthier households within the community. To the best of my knowledge, this is the first study to demonstrate the causal effect of socio-economic status on matching in reciprocal transfer links.
The paper also contributes to the literature on crowding-out of informal transfers by public transfers. Early empirical studies have demonstrated a modest negative correlation between household income and transfers received (Cox and Jakubson (1995) , Altonji et al. (1997) ) -although the relationship is likely to be heterogenous and nonlinear (Cox (1987) , Schoeni (1997) , Cox et al. (2004) ). 4 The program I study leads to sustained long-term improvements in the socio-economic conditions of targeted poor households through a one-off transfer of assets and skills. I show that while the program crowds-out informal transfers received by the targeted poor households, the effect is relatively small and varies based on geographic proximity. While transfers from outside the village are crowded out, transfers from households living in the same village as the targeted poor are not. This suggests that transfers within and outside the local community are driven by different motives. In particular, our findings are in line with within-community transfers being driven by incentive-related motives (such as reciprocal exchange), as opposed to preference-related motives (Leider et al. (2009) , Ligon and Schechter (2012) ).
Finally, the paper is related to the literature on interlinkage in rural labor markets. 5 Previous empirical work has studied interlinkages between trade and financial markets in developing countries (McMillan and Woodruff (1999) , Casaburi and Reeds (2015) , Casaburi and Machiavello (2016) ), but empirical work on interlinkage in the similar risk attitudes group together for risk-sharing. Ligon and Schechter (2012) also use an experimental approach and show that transfers within the experiment are more likely to be motivated by reciprocity (as opposed to other-regarding preferences) when individuals are connected (and exchange transfers) outside of the experiment. Ado and Kurosaki (2014) replicate the same methodology in a different context and find similarly that incentive-related motives (reciprocity and sanction aversion) are more likely to be associated with sharing in the real world. 4 Jensen (2003) and Juarez (2009) find large crowding out effects of increases in public transfers targeted to the elderly in South Africa and Mexico respectively. Albarran and Attanasio (2002) find that beneficiaries of a conditional cash transfer program in Mexico (Progresa) were less likely to receive informal transfers, and conditional on receiving any, they received lower amounts of transfers. On the other hand, Angelucci and de Giorgi (2009) provides evidence that households eligible for Mexico's Progresa program increased transfers to ineligible households residing in treatment villages. Walker (2017) shows that a one-time unconditional cash transfer in Kenya did not lead to any change in transfer giving to family and friends among recipient households in the short-run. 5 The literature on village economies has shown that employers may provide assistance to their poorer workers in times of need, through the provision of consumption loans or transfers (Platteau and Abraham (1987) , Platteau (1995a Platteau ( , 1995b)) ). Theoretically, workers with limited outside options may prefer to maintain a long-term relationship with an employer in order to have smoother earnings across the agricultural seasons, even though this may end up providing them with a lower wage relative to causal labor contracts available on the spot labor market (Bardhan (1983) , Mukherjee and Ray (1995), Caselli (1997) ).
rural labor market has been largely descriptive (Bardhan and Rudra (1978, 1981) , Richards (1979), Anderson (1990) ). This paper contributes to the literature by showing that poverty level of the worker may have a causal effect on interlinkage of contracts in the rural labor market with informal insurance arrangements. Importantly, due to the nature of the particular antipoverty program I study (it is designed to increase self-employment among the targeted poor households) the effects may in part be due to the fall in wage-labor caused by the program. It is unclear whether a reduction in poverty caused by another type of intervention would have a similar effect on the interlinkage of employment and transfers.
The TUP program is a multi-faceted intervention with the central aim of lifting households out of extreme poverty. The main beneficiary of the program is an adult woman, and to improve their socio-economic conditions, the program combines the transfer of productive assets with complementary training, a cash stipend and other supporting services. This section describes the selection procedure of the beneficiaries and the details of the program.
In order to identify the potential beneficiaries of the program, BRAC proceeds in four steps. First, BRAC officials in Dhaka select the BRAC branch offices where the program would be implemented. Then, BRAC officials at the branches identify which communities would be targeted. In the third step, program officials organize a participatory wealth ranking in each community selected for the program. This exercise places all households into one of several wealth bins corresponding to the poor, middle and upper classes. 6 Finally, BRAC officers verify which households among the poor satisfy pre-determined inclusion and exclusion criteria. Based on these criteria, they subdivide the poor (as determined by the community appraisal) into "ultra-poor", who are eligible for the TUP program, and the rest ("other poor"). 7 Eligibility is determined at baseline, and was not reevaluated within treatment villages over time. The share of treated households relative to the average village population was 6%. 8
The first component of the program is asset transfer. Assets are chosen by the beneficiaries from a menu offered by BRAC. The menu includes assets related to various income-generating activities (such as livestock rearing, vegetable cultivation, setting up small retail shops, production of small crafts) but almost all eligible women in our sample opted for livestock rearing. For this, beneficiaries had the option to choose between six different livestock packages containing either one or two animal types (e.g. only cows or a cow and five goats), and all packages were on average of similar value of BDT 9500 (approximately USD 514 in PPP terms) in 2007. BRAC encouraged program recipients to commit to retain the assets for two years, although this commitment was not strictly enforceable. After two years, beneficiaries were under no obligation or no encouragement to retain the livestock asset.
The second key component of the program is skills transfer. In this, the program aims to teach the beneficiaries skills that are complementary to the transferred livestock asset, such as maintaining livestock health, best-practices related to feeding the animals, insemination to produce offspring and milk, rearing calves, bringing outputs to the market etc. The initial skills transfer was conducted through a combination of classroom training at BRAC regional offices. This was followed with regular assistance and coaching by a livestock specialist and program officers, as well as refresher trainings that took place periodically to strengthen the initial technical training. During these refresher trainings and visits, further knowledge to participants is delivered, their performance is monitored and various challenges are discussed followed by troubleshooting. As part of this, every beneficiary was visited by a livestock specialist every one to two months for the first year, and by BRAC program officers weekly for the first two years of the program.
In addition to asset and skills transfer, the program entails a number of supporting services. Program officers organize weekly meetings which bring program beneficiaries from the same village together with one another, and they conduct life-skills awareness sessions. The objective of these sessions is to sensitize participants and to make them more aware of their legal and political rights. Some of the topics covered during these visits include health issues, such as waterborne diseases, de-worming, food, nutrition and anaemia, family planning, immunization; social issues such as child marriage, dowry, domestic violence, marriage registration and the importance of children's education. assets (livestock) transferred and to receive the training. If there are multiple female members in the household, then it is up to the household to decide which female member should be the main point of contact with the program officers. This is not to say that other household members do not benefit from the program indirectly, but in terms of the program's operations, the main beneficiary is the female head of the household.
During their weekly visits, program officers also distribute weekly cash stipends to the program beneficiaries. This is meant to alleviate any short-run fall in earnings due to the occupational change induced by the program and to provide consumption support for ultra-poor households. The exact amount of the stipend varies across regions, but it is meant to be equivalent to half a day's wage for casual laborers (BRAC (2016)). These cash transfers typically last for the first 40 weeks after the asset transfer. To ensure proper utilization of this stipend, beneficiaries are also provided with diet charts which indicate affordable and nutrient-rich food items available in their localities.
Another component of the program is to promote savings behavior. To achieve this, program beneficiaries are encouraged to save a portion of their monthly income in BRAC's savings account. The idea behind this is to help the ultra-poor households start building financial security for further enterprise expansion and to lower their vulnerability to shocks. The program officers collect savings during the weekly meetings they organize for the program members.
The program also provides health support through BRAC's community-based health workers. Beneficiaries receive guidance about preventative care, treatment, antenatal and prenatal care, contraception and childcare, as well as financial assistance for surgical cases. In some areas, BRAC also implements public health interventions such as latrine and tube-well installation.
Finally, in order to strengthen the social networks of the ultra-poor households, BRAC establishes local committees called Gram Daridro Bimochon (Village Poverty Alleviation) Committees (henceforth 'GDBC'). Each committee comprises of representatives of the program beneficiaries (i.e. ultra-poor women) and community leaders such as wealthier landlords, teachers, priests, local politicians. The GDBC meets monthly and discusses any issue raised by the representatives of the program beneficiaries with the aim of helping them build social networks and leverage community ties. The committee is meant to help participants protect their assets, facilitate access to government services, and offer support in times of need by convening local community support.
The implementation of the components described above last for a maximum period of 24 months. After this period, the beneficiary households are "graduated" from the program. Upon graduation, they are invited to participate in BRAC's microfinance program, with the idea that access to microcredit can enable them to maintain and expand their business activities; but they are in no obligation to borrow from BRAC microfinance.
Figure 1 provides a visual summary of the main components of the program and the timeline of its implementation.
We are interested in understanding whether and if so how a multi-faceted antipoverty program, such as the TUP program, may affect the informal transfer arrangements of beneficiary households. The program entails many components and there are multiple ways through which it may impact both the supply of informal transfers to the targeted ultra-poor households, as well as the demand for such transfers by them. In this section, I discuss how the various components of the program may affect both the level of transfers received/given by ultra-poor households, as well as who they interact with in transfer networks.
First, the asset and cash transfer components of the program may affect interhousehold transfers received/given by the ultra-poor households. A large literature in public economics discusses alternative mechanisms through which formal transfer programs may crowd out private (informal) transfers, depending on the motivations driving informal transfers. If they are driven by pure altruism (Becker (1974) ), formal transfers would unambiguously crowd out informal transfers (Barro (1974) ). Alternatively, informal transfers may take place in exchange for a service provided by the recipient (Bernheim et al. (1985) , Cox (1987) ) or in anticipation of reciprocal future transfers (Kranton (1996) ). In that case, the effect of an increase in the amount of formal transfers on the amount of informal transfers received is ambiguous. 9 If informal transfers are part of informal insurance arrangements between agents, an increase in formal transfers received by an agent will partly be undone by transfers to insurance partners of the agent. 10 Second, the program enables the poor to develop new sources of income (mainly livestock rearing) and lowers their dependence on seasonal casual labor. 11 This may im- 9 Cox et al. (1998) show that if transfers occur as a result of bargaining between the two parties where the recipient provides some services to the donor in exchange of the transfer he receives, then conditional on receiving a positive transfer, an increase in the recipient's income would lead to an increase in his outside option and thus may result in an increase in the informal transfer he receives. Cox et al. (2004) show that, the combination of altruism and exchange motives may result in a nonlinear response to an increase in the income of the recipient. 10 Under perfect risk-sharing (Townsend (1994) ), any increase in the resources available to an agent will enter the resource pool shared with his/her insurance partners and will increase the informal transfers given by the agent. Therefore, if the agent was a net recipient of informal transfers ex-ante, the increase in formal transfers s/he receives would lead to a decrease in the amount of informal transfers s/he receives. Generalizing the perfect risk-sharing model to allow for imperfect insurance due to, for instance, imperfect enforceability (Coate and Ravallion (1993) , Ligon et al. (2002) ) or asymmetric information (Ligon (1998)) would yield similar predictions, although the mechanism at work may differ. Attanasio and Rios-Rull (2000) show that, under imperfect enforceability, introduction of unconditional formal transfers in a situation where agents have very high marginal utility of consumption will induce a reduction in the amount of equilibrium risk-sharing, which implies a lower level of informal transfers for any given income shock. 11 See Bandiera et al. (2017) for a thorough discussion of the types of jobs available to the ultra poor women in this context and the seasonality associated with them.
prove their resilience to shocks (both by increasing the level of income and lowering seasonality of earnings) and lower their need for informal insurance.
Third, the program provides health support to the beneficiary households. This may partially lower the need for informal insurance (and lower transfers), both by lowering the risk of health shocks and by enabling treated households to rely on BRAC's health services rather than receiving help from the social networks when faces with health shocks.
Third, the program encourages and facilitates saving behavior among the targeted ultra-poor households. These savings may act as an alternative source of insurance, thus lowering the poor's demand for informal insurance and crowd out their interhousehold transfers (Chandrasekhar et al. (2011), Flory (2018) ).
Fifth, a unique aspect of the program is the creation of committees that bring together the village elite with representative of the ultra-poor households (GDBCs). One of the central aims of GDBCs is to encourage the local elites to help vulnerable ultra-poor households in times of need. This may lead to more transfers being funneled from the elites towards the ultra poor households, thus lowering any crowding out effect that may occur due to the other components of the program.
Sixth, once the initial two years of the program are over and the ultra poor households graduate, they are invited to participate in BRAC's mainstream microfinance program. Participation in microcredit has ambiguous effect on participation in informal transfer networks. On one hand, participation in microfinance group meetings may lead to creation of new social networks, increasing risk-sharing and transfers among the poor (Feigenberg et al. (2013) ). On the other hand, standard microcredit contract that BRAC offers is rather restrictive, with regular loan repayments (Battaglia et al. (2019) ) that may help shield the targeted poor from kinship taxes in the form of demands for transfers from their social networks (Baland et al. (2011) ).
The program may also affect who the ultra-poor households receive transfers from or give transfers to. Previous work has shown that the program leads to long-term improvements in socio-economic statuses of ultra-poor households (Bandiera et al. (2017) ). This may affect who ultra-poor households are matched with in transfer networks (Genicot (2006) , Munshi and Rosenzweig (2016) ). Moreover, an important aspect of the program is to create community networks and community support for ultra-poor households, through (a) increasing the interactions among ultra-poor households (b) the establishment of GDBCs that bring together the village elite with representative of the ultra-poor. Both of these features of the program may lead to the creation of new transfer networks and/or weakening of existing ties.
An alternative source of transfers for the rural poor may be their employers. An em-inent literature in development economics studies interlinked labor and patronage relationships in village economies (Bardhan (1983) , Mukherjee and Ray (1995), Platteau (1995a, 1995b) ). When faced with a negative income shock, poor workers may need a transfer or a loan from their employers. This demand for informal insurance may affect the terms of the labor contract, generating an interlinkage between the labor and insurance markets. 12 The program, by improving the outside option(s) of the poorest workers may enable them to transition from interlinked labor to casual labor and/or self-employment. Thus, the program may reduce their likelihood to be receiving transfers from their employers.
The dataset I use was collected in order to evaluate BRAC's TUP program in Bangladesh. The data covers 1409 communities, with the average community consisting of 90 households (387 individuals). 13 At baseline, an initial census of all households was carried out in every community, covering 126,810 households. This census collected information on the identity as well as wealth, occupation, education and demographic characteristics of all the households living in these communities at baseline.
Following the census, a detailed household questionnaire was carried out on a representative sample of households. For the sampling, census data was combined with information on households' socio-economic statuses from the community wealth appraisal BRAC conducted as part of their procedure of identifying the ultra-poor households (see Section 2). The sample for the household survey included all (ultra and other) poor households and a random sample of the rest of the community. This corresponds to 7953 ultra-poor households and an additional 19,012 non-ultra-poor households. Households in this sample were surveyed at baseline (between April and December 2007), at midline (2009) and endline (2011). As detailed in Section 2, the implementation of the program lasts at most two years -less for some of its components, such as the subsistence allowance which lasts for a maximum of 40 weeks. This implies that by the time the midline survey was conducted, the program implementation was nearly completed in many communities, and by the endline survey it had been completed in all communities for at least 1 year. An additional followup survey was conducted in 2014 and I will use this data to examine the long-run effects of the program for early versus late-treated ultra-poor households.
The household survey measured a number of individual outcomes, including occupa-tional choices, labor supply, income, social and economic networks of the household. The main survey modules were directed towards the main female in the household, who is the intended beneficiary in ultra-poor households. In cases where the main female was different from the household head, the head of the household was also surveyed for the business activities and land modules. To capture the social and economic networks of the household, respondents were asked to list households they interacted with for each of the surveyed activities. For example, in the business activities module, the respondent reported her main employer(s) for all income-generating activities she was involved in. If they reported a household within the same community as their own, the identity of this household was recorded (using the census listing).
To capture transfers exchanged between households, respondents were asked to report any transfers their household received and any transfers their household gave to others during the 12 months preceding each survey wave. For each transaction, they were asked the value of the transfer, whether it was in cash or in kind, the location of the sender/recipient, 14 and the identity of the sender/recipient. If the transfer source/recipient was a household residing in the same village as the respondent, their identity was recorded using the census listing. During the piloting of the baseline survey, it was observed that many respondents reported major transfer transactions, but left out smaller, in-kind transfers (which would only come up upon prompting by enumerators) that typically consisted of food items. In order to capture such transactions, respondents were asked if their household ever received food from other households and if so who the main sources/recipients of such transfers were. For every respondent, up to three sources and three recipients of food transfers were recorded. 15 Attrition: Over the four years from baseline to endline, 13% of ultra-poor households and 15% of non-ultra-poor households attrited from the original sample. Table S1 .1 in Appendix S1 tests for differential attrition among the ultra-poor in treatment and control communities. Two findings are of note. First, attrition rates are the same in treatment and control communities. Second, attrition is not differentially correlated with the interaction of treatment status and the baseline levels of key outcomes of interest: transfers received/given (neither on the extensive nor the intensive margin) or the likelihood to have received transfers from employers. Therefore, to ease com-parability across different specifications, I will restrict the sample to households that appear in all three waves throughout.
Table 1 presents baseline descriptive statistics on characteristics of households in our sample. I use the wealth classes determined by the community appraisal at baseline to divide the sample into three groups: poor, middle and upper class households. I further divide the poor households into those who were deemed (by BRAC) to be eligible for the program (the ultra-poor) and those who were not found to be eligible (the other poor). The first panel of the table shows that this classification (based on the community-determined wealth classes and BRAC's selection criteria) is associated with significant differences in terms of the household's economic status and the main (female) respondent's human capital endowment. As indicators of economic status, I use the value of physical assets (land, livestock, other productive assets and household durables) and per capita household consumption. As proxies for human capital, I use respondents' (the primary female in the household) literacy and height. Table 1 shows that ultra-poor households have lower assets and consumption compared to other wealth classes -including the other poor households. They also have lower literacy rates and the respondents from ultra poor households are shorter than women from other wealth classes. The differences between the different wealth classes are statistically significant at conventional levels. 16 This shows that the program's selection criteria was successful in identifying the poorest households in these communities. Panel B of Table 1 shows summary statistics related to informal transfers received. On average 22% of ultra-poor households reported receiving any transfers in the year preceding the baseline survey. The corresponding rates were similar in other wealth classes -except for the middle class where 16% of households had received any transfers during the past year. However, on the intensive margin (i.e. in terms of the value of transfers received), ultra-poor households had received significantly less compared to other wealth classes. Relative to the ultra-poor households, the value of informal transfers received by middle class households was 90% higher and the upper classes had received nearly 12-times more. When asked whether they ever received food from other households, 92% of ultra-poor households responded positively and they reported, on average, 2 households as their most common sources of food transfers. The corresponding figures are similar for the other-poor households but lower for wealthier households. Only 43% of the wealthiest households in the community reported ever receiving food transfers and on average they reported 1 household as source of food transfers. The final row in Panel B shows the fraction of transfer sources (food or otherwise) who were living within the same community as the respondent's house-hold. For the poor and middle classes, 88% of transfer sources were from the community, while the corresponding figure was lower (70%) for the upper class households. This suggests that the richest households in these communities are likely to have social networks that expand beyond their locality and send remittances. 17 Panel C of Table 1 summarizes the pattern of informal transfers given by the sampled households. Only 2% of ultra-poor households made any transfers in the past year, and only 44% reported ever giving food to other households. The corresponding rates are higher for wealthier households. Among the richest households in the community, 21% had given some transfers to others in the past year and 81% reported ever giving food transfers. The majority of these transfers were given to households within the same community, albeit with some variation across the wealth classes.
Comparison of rates and levels of transfers received versus transfers given (Panel B versus C) suggest that, especially for poor households in these communities, transfers received are not always reciprocated with transfers given. In Panel D, I report the fraction of transfer sources who are also reported as transfer recipients. Note that I can only do this for within-community transfer sources, since the network-mapping allows us to identify the identity of network members within (but not outside) the community. Nevertheless, since the majority of the transfers happen within the community, especially for the poorer households, this should capture a significant share of the transfer network. On average, only 42% of transfer sources of the ultra-poor households were reciprocated (i.e. reported also as recipients of transfers), while the corresponding rate was 50% for other poor, 67% for middle class and 80% for the richest households in the community. 18 The final row in Table 1 shows that 10% of the ultra-poor respondents reported an employer (of the primary female or the male head of the household) as a source of transfers. The corresponding rate was 8% among the other poor and 3% for middle class households. This suggests that one potential source, especially for the poorest households, may be their members' employers. The literature on interlinked labor contracts suggests that there may be a trade-off between earnings versus risk-sharing motives. Bardhan (1983) shows that workers with limited outside options may end up selecting jobs that provide them with a smoother income across the year but a lower wage rate. Consistent with this, I find that receiving transfers from an employer is correlated with having a lower hourly wage and less volatile annual wage earnings at baseline. 19 17 Munshi and Rosenzweig (2016) find a similar pattern in India. Their model attributes this pattern to greater demand to share resources making wealthier households more likely to send migrants outside the network (their focus is on the subcaste network). 18 This pattern is in line with Schechter and Yuskavage (2011) who find that in Paraguay, unreciprocated transfer links are more likely when one household is wealthier or more educated than the other. 19 To estimate the correlation between the terms of the labor contract and receiving informal trans-Table 2 presents an overview of how households from different wealth classes were matched in transfer networks at baseline. Panel A shows percentages of households receiving transfers from different socio-economic classes at baseline. 18% of ultra poor reported another ultra poor household as a transfer source, while the corresponding rates are lower for other wealth classes (10% for other poor, 5% for middle and 1% for the upper class households). As we move up along the wealth classes likelihood of receiving transfers from a given class rises. Interestingly, within every wealth class, the likelihood to receive transfers from one's own wealth class is the highest. For example, 26% of respondents from the top wealth class reported other rich households in their village as sources of transfers, while the corresponding rate is 21% for the ultra poor. Similarly, 69% of the middle class respondents reported other middle class households in their village as sources of transfers, while the corresponding rate is 66% for ultra-poor households (the difference is significant at 99% confidence level). The lower panel shows the likelihood that a household reported giving transfers to another, by wealth class of the respondent and the transfer recipient. The wealthier households are more likely to give transfers to middle or upper class households compared to the ultra poor: only 12% of the upper class respondents reported giving transfers to an ultra poor household, while 52% and 29% reported middle or upper class households. Similarly, among the middle class households, only 7% reported an ultra poor as a transfer recipient, while 60% reported other middle class households. While these patterns suggest that households are more likely to exchange transfers with similar socio-economic classes as their own, they do not necessarily prove causality. Socioeconomic classes are likely to be endogenous to the structure of social networks within a community. I will return to this in section 5.3 where I estimate the causal effect of poverty on the way households are matched in transfer connections.
To evaluate the TUP program, the timing of the program's roll-out was randomized at BRAC branch office level. BRAC determined 40 branch offices that would implement the program. Standard procedures to identify who would be the beneficiaries of the program were carried out (by BRAC program officers) in all of these branches in the same way. Following the identification of potential beneficiary households, 20 branch offices were randomly selected to receive the program in 2007, and the rest in 2011.
fers from the employer, I regress the worker's wage rate on an indicator variable for having reported an employer's household as a source of transfers at baseline, controlling for observable chacteristics of the worker (wealth, literacy, height, age, age-squared). Table S1 .3 in the Appendix shows the results. Workers who reported their employers as source of transfers for their household received significantly lower hourly wages. Transfers from employers were associated with a 5% lower wage for female and 7% lower wage for male workers relative to the sample average. Moreover, workers receiving transfers also had less volatile earnings from wage-labor but this correlation is imprecisely estimated at conventional levels.
The randomization was stratified at the subdistrict level -within each subdistrict, one branch was randomly allocated to treatment and one to the control group. All of the selected communities in treatment branches were treated in 2007 while the control communities were not treated until after the endline survey in 2011.
Table S1 .4 reports baseline balance tests which compare the characteristics of ultrapoor households in treatment and control groups at baseline. For every variable, the table reports the mean and standard deviation in treatment and control communities, as well as the p-value on a test of equality of means (column 7) and the normalized difference of means (column 8). Overall, the samples are well balanced: only 2 out of 26 tests for the equality of the means are rejected; and all of the normalized differences are below the .25 threshold recommended by Imbens and Wooldrige (2009) . Thus we can conclude that the randomization was successful and the control sample provides a valid counterfactual for the treatment group.
In order to estimate the effects of the TUP program, I pool observations from the two followup surveys and estimate an ANCOVA model. In particular, I estimate:
where y idt is the outcome of interest for household i from subdistrict d at survey wave t with time periods referring to 2007 baseline (t=0), 2009 midline (t=1) and 2011 endline (t=2); T i is an indicator variable equal to 1 if household i lived in a treatment branch and 0 otherwise; y id0 is the baseline level of the outcome variable for household i; and δ d are subdistrict (randomization strata) fixed effects. The parameter of interest is λ, the difference between treatment and control observations. The standard errors are clustered at the BRAC branch office level (the unit of randomization) in all the regressions. Under the identifying assumption that the control branches represent a valid counterfactual for the treated branches in the absence of the program, namely that trends in all outcomes of interest are the same in treatment and control branches, λ identifies the causal effect of the TUP program on y idt . I will estimate (1) on the full sample of ultra-poor households, thus estimating the intention to treat (ITT) effect. 20 In order to test for the differences in treatment effects at midline and endline surveys, I estimate the following specification:
where the main point of departure from specification 1 is the inclusion of the interaction term T i • S t=2 . As such, in specification 2, λ corresponds to the treatment effect at midline and θ estimates the difference between the treatment effect at endline compared to midline. The results are reported in Appendix S2. In general, I find that the estimates for θ are statistically and economically insignificant for our outcomes of interest. In the few cases where this is not the case, I draw the reader's attention to the difference between midline and endline treatment effects. 21
Table 3 presents findings on the impact of the program on transfers received/provided by ultra-poor households during the 1past year. "Treatment" shows the estimate for λ in specification (1) . The first column of the table shows that the program reduced the likelihood of receiving transfers by 13 percentage points (ppt), which corresponds to a 26% reduction relative to the control group. On the intensive margin (column 2), the value of transfers received by the ultra-poor was lower by BDT 105 (13% relative to control) but this effect is imprecisely estimated. Columns 3 and 4 show that the program did not have a significant impact on the likelihood or level of transfers provided by ultra-poor households to others -the point estimates are positive, but imprecisely estimated. As a result, the effect on net trasfers (columns 5 and 6) was a reduction. Ultra-poor households in treatment branches were 13 ppt less likely to be net transfer recipients and received, in net, BDT 151 less in transfers (24% relative to control).
The lower panels of Table 3 break down the transfers by the location of the households giving or receiving transfers to/from the ultra-poor households. Panel B shows the treatment effects on transfers exchanged with households within the same community, and Panel C with those outside the village. I find that the ultra-poor in treatment branches were 4ppt less likely to receive transfers from within their communities. On the intensive margin, they received more transfers from their neighbors. In particular, the value of transfers they received from households in their community was higher by BDT 41, which corresponds to a 29% increase relative to the control group. There was no significant treatment effect on transfers the ultra-poor households made to other households within their communities (columns 3 and 4), and as such the net effect (columns 5 and 6) was similar to the effect on transfers received. In contrast, Panel C shows that transfers received from outside the village were significantly lower, both on the extensive (by 12ppt) and on the intensive margin (by BDT 144, or 23% relative to control). 22 Next, I analyze the effects on ultra-poor households' participation in food transfers. Table 4 presents the findings. On average, 94% of the control group reported that their household received food transfers. The program led to a small (1.3ppt) increase in this rate. Moreover, ultra-poor in treatment communities reported 0.10 more households as sources of food transfers, a 4% increase relative to the control group. Looking at the corresponding effect on food transfers given by ultra-poor households, columns 3 and 4 of the table show that ultra-poor were 7ppt more likely to give food transfers to others and on average they transferred food to .23 more households (18% more relative to control). 23 The rest of the Table shows that these changes are driven by changes in food transfers within the village (Panel B), while food transfers sources from outside the village are slightly lower (Panel C). 24 To summarize, the findings in this section suggest that the program crowded out informal transfers received by ultra-poor households, but this effect is less pronounced for within-village transfers. If anything, it led to a modest increase in the value of transfers received and the number of food transfer sources within the community. 22 In Appendix S2, I compare the treatment effects measured at midline and endline surveys. Table S2 .1 shows that the treatment effects at midline are not statistically different from those estimated at endline. However, on the intensive margin, the large point estimates for θ suggest the crowding out effect (on the intensive margin) is not diminishing, and possibly getting larger, over time. It is possible to conduct the same analysis on informal loans exchanged with other households. Appendix Table S1 .8 presents the treatment effects on interhousehold loans received/given by ultra poor households. The program lowers the value of informal loans received by ultra poor households, while it increases both the likelihood of giving loans and the value of loans given by ultra poor to other households. As a result, in net, value of loans received by ultra poor household goes down, by nearly 100% relative to the control group. This is true for both loans within and outside the village. These findings complement the results reported in Bandiera et al. (2017) where I analyzed the treatment effects on likelihood of receiving and giving loans (see Table IV ). I showed that the program increased the likelihood of both receiving and giving loans by the ultra-poor. The key difference between the results in Bandiera et al. (2017) and those reported here is the fact that loans received in Bandiera et al. (2017) include formal loans, whereas the results in Table S1 .8 are limited to interhousehold loans alone. 23 For food transfers, data on the intensive margin (value of transfers) was not collected. However, at midline and endline surveys, respondents were asked to report whether their households' frequency of borrowing (lending) from (to) households reported as sources (recipients) of food transfers at baseline had increased, decreased or remained the same. In Appendix Table S1 .5 I use this information to test if the program affected the frequency of borrowing or lending food to baseline network partners. Overall, I fail to find a consistent effect. Ultra-poor in treated communities were (relative to control) less likely to say their borrowing from baseline sources of food transfers had increased, but they were no more likely to say it had decreased; and there was no significant change in their frequency of giving food to baseline recipients either. Based on this, I conclude that the program did not crowd out food transfers the ultra-poor exchanged with their baseline network members. On the other hand it led to a modest increase (on the extensive margin) in food transfers the ultra-poor exchanged with other households within their communities. 24 Table S2 .2 in Appendix S2 tests whether the treatment effects at midline differ from those at endline. The effects typically get larger in magnitude by the endline, the differences are never precisely estimated.
In this section, I examine whether the program led to any changes in terms of who the ultra-poor households exchanged transfers with. In particular, I estimate the effects of the program on the likelihood that the ultra-poor exchange (receive or give) transfers with households from different wealth classes in their communities. The first panel of Table 5 shows that the program increased ultra-poor households' likelihood to receive transfers from other ultra-poor households by 6ppt (44% relative to control) and from other poor households by 4ppt (10%). There was no significant effect on the likelihood of receiving transfers from middle or upper class households. Panel B shows that the program led to an increase on the likelihood of giving transfers to all wealth classes. In particular, ultra-poor in treated communities were 5ppt (48%) more likely to give transfers to households within their own wealth class, 3ppt (13%) more to other poor, 5ppt (14%) to middle and 2ppt (21%) more likely to provide transfers to upper class households in their communities. 25 As an alternative test of effects on matching and to control for any self-reporting bias, I limit the sample to non-ultra-poor households and estimate the treatment effects on their likelihood to exchange transfers with ultra-poor and other wealth classes within the community. For this, I first estimate specification (1) on the sample of non-ultra households. The estimate for λ corresponds to the average treatment effect on all nonultra-poor households. Secondly, I estimate:
where C i is baseline wealth class of household i (other poor, middle or upper class). In this specification, λ c gives the treatment effect on wealth class c. Table 6 presents the results. Panel A1 shows that non-ultra-poor households in treated communities were on average 2ppt more likely to report receiving transfers from ultra-poor households within their communities. This corresponds to a large (37%) increase relative to the control group. On the other hand, there was no significant impact on transfers received from other wealth classes (columns 2-4). Panel A2 breaks down the effects by the respondent's wealth class, i.e. the estimates for λ c in specification (3). Column 1 25 Note that at baseline, the ultra-poor households in the treatment group were less likely to receive/give transfers to upper class households compared to the ultra poor in the control group and this difference was statistically significant (see Table S1 .4). As such, the treatment effect on transfers received/given to upper class households should be interpreted with caution. Having said that, the direction of the baseline difference suggests that the treatment effects I estimate are likely to be lower bound estimates of the true treatment effect. In Appendix Table S2 .3 I assess the difference between midline and endline treatment effects on non-ultra-poors' likelihood to received transfers from different wealth classes. The results show no significant differences between the two surveys for most outcomes, except for the likelihood to give transfers to the upper class. The treatment effect at endline is significantly higher than at the midline. This suggest that it takes time for the ultra-poor households to start providing transfers to the highest wealth classes.
shows that other poor households were 4ppt more likely to report receiving transfers from ultra-poor in treated communities, corresponding to a 46% increase relative to the control group. The middle classes were 2.5ppt (52%) more likely to receive transfers from ultra-poor, while the corresponding effect was 1ppt (71%) for the wealthiest class. The remaining columns in Panel A2 shows no significant effects for other wealth classes. This implies that the increase in likelihood of transfers from ultra-poor households observed in column 1 did not crowd out non-ultra-poor households' likelihood of receiving transfers from other wealth classes 26 The lower panel of Table 6 shows the effects on transfers given by non-ultra-poor households to different wealth classes. On average, the non-ultra-poor households were 3ppt more likely to report giving transfers to ultra-poor in their communities (a 35% increase relative to the control group). Columns 2 to 4 show that the treatment effects on likelihood of transfers to other wealth classes are negative but small in magnitude and imprecisely estimated. Panel B2 breaks down the effects by wealth class of the respondent's household. Respondents from other poor and middle class households were 3ppt more likely to report giving transfers to ultra-poor households. While the corresponding effect for upper class households is also positive, it is imprecisely estimated. 27 The rest of the table shows that there were no significant spillover effects of the program on non-ultra-poor households' likelihood to give transfers to households from other non-ultra-poor households. 28 In order to assess the long-run effects of the program, I use data from the third followup survey that was conducted in 2014, that is seven years after the baseline. At that point, 49% of control communities had also been treated by the program. Moreover, only the female respondents were surveyed and detailed network information was not collected. However, respondents from all wealth classes were asked whether they provided informal transfers to any of the ultra-poor households within their communities, and if so to which ones. They were also asked whether they used to provide transfers to any of the ultra-poor households seven years ago, and if so to which ones they used to provide transfers to. I use these two pieces of information to test whether households in the early-treatment communities (i.e. treated in 2007) are differentially more likely to provide transfers to ultra-poor households in their communities, and how the effects vary by the wealth class of the respondent's household. For this, I estimate specification (3), using as y id0 the retrospective question on pre-treatment transfers. Table 7 presents the results. The first column shows that non-ultra-poor households in early-treatment communities were significantly more likely to report giving transfers to ultra-poor households in their communities. In particular, the long-run treatment effect for other poor households is 1.3ppt, for middle classes 2ppt and for the upper classes it is 3ppt. These effects are both statistically and economically significant (very few non-ultra-poor households in the control group reported giving transfers to the ultra-poor, as demonstrated by the means reported in the lower panel). The second column shows that the percentage of ultra-poor households reported as receiving transfers from middle and upper class households were higher by 0.5 and 1.2 ppt respectively -corresponding to about 100% increase relative to the respective control group means. This implies that the program led to a long-run increase in the likelihood that ultra-poor households receive informal transfers from higher wealth classes within their communities.
To sum up, I find that the program increased ultra-poor households' likelihood to give transfers, not only to other ultra-poor households but to households in wealthier classes within their communities. One possible explanation for this could be that the program, by improving ultra-poor's economic conditions, may have enabled them to reciprocate past transfers they used to receive from others. In line with this, I show in Appendix Table S1 .6 that the increase in ultra-poor's transfers are largely driven by an increase in their likelihood to provide transfers to households who at baseline used to be their transfer sources. Households who used to provide transfers to ultra-poor at baseline experience a larger increase in their likelihood to receive transfers from ultra-poor in their communities. Nevertheless, there is also some significant, although weaker, effects for other poor and middle class households who were not providing transfers to the ultra-poor at baseline. Moreover, I showed above that the ultra-poor also become more likely to receive transfers from wealthier classes within their communities. This suggests that the effects are not only driven by ultra-poor reciprocating for past transfers. Instead, some of the impact must be driven by a change in terms of who the ultra-poor households are exchanging transfers with. In the following section, I will test directly whether the program affected the reciprocity of informal transfer links of the ultra-poor.
In order to estimate the treatment effect on reciprocity of transfers, I estimate specification (1) using as the outcome variable the fraction of ultra-poor's transfer sources who are also reported as receivers of transfers. Table 8 presents the results. In the control group, 51% of ultra-poor's transfer sources were also reported as recipients of transfers by the ultra-poor. The program led to an 8ppt increase (15%) in the reciprocity of ultra-poor's transfer connections. The following columns of the table break down this measure according to the baseline wealth class of the connection. The results show that the reciprocity of ultra-poor's transfers increased with all wealth classes, and especially with households who were ranked in higher wealth classes at baseline. In particular, reciprocity of ultra-poor's transfers increased by 9ppt (17%) with other poor, by 9ppt (19%) with middle class and by 12ppt (44%) with upper class households. In contrast, the increase in reciprocity of transfers with other ultra-poor was 4.4ppt (7%) and marginally significant. 29 An alternative source of transfers for ultra-poor households at baseline may be their employer(s). Baseline correlations presented in section 4.1 suggested that such transfers may be reciprocated by working for a lower wage rate, lowering the costs of labor for the employers. 30 In Table 9 , I test whether the program affected ultra-poor households' likelihood to receive transfers from their members' employers. The dependent variable in column 1 is an indicator for having received any transfers from an employer of either the main female respondent or the male head of the household. On average, 9% of ultra-poor households in the control group reported an employer as a source of transfers for their household. The program led to a fall in the likelihood of receiving transfers from employers by 4 ppt. This effect is both statistically and economically significant (43% relative to the control group). The next two columns show the effect for the female and the male respondent(s) separately. Ultra-poor households were 4ppt less likely to receive transfers from an employer of the main female respondent, while the corresponding effect for the male respondents were 1.3ppt. While these effects suggest that the improvement in socio-economic conditions of ultra-poor households may have reduced their engagement in interlinked labor contracts, they may also be driven by the fall in wage-labor caused by the program. In fact, Table S1 .7 in Appendix S1 shows that the program significantly reduced labor supply of both female and male respondents into wage-labor (although the effect on the extensive margin is insignificant for the latter). As such, it is possible that the fall in likelihood of 29 Appendix Table S2 .5 tests whether the treatments effects on reciprocity of ultra-poor's transfer links differ between the midline and endline surveys. The results show that the treatment effects were significantly higher at endline relative to midline. This implies that the increase in reciprocity happened gradually over time, and was only fully realized by the endline survey. In other words, it took time for the ultra-poor households to establish reciprocal transfer links. 30 See Table S1 .3 discussed in footnote 19 above.
receiving transfers from employers may simply capture a fall in having an employer. In order to assess whether the effect is driven by this, in Panel B of Table 9 I restrict the sample to ultra-poor households who are engaged in wage-employment at baseline as well as at the two followup surveys. Similarly, I find that households within this subsample are less likely to receive transfers from their employers. Note that this analysis has a caveat (since it is based on a selected sample), as such, it should be interpreted as suggestive evidence. 31 Overall, the findings in this section imply that the program led to a change in the mechanisms through which ultra-poor households reciprocate transfers from others. The reduction in their poverty level enabled the ultra-poor to have reciprocal transfer connections with other households in their communities, and reduced their likelihood to receive transfers from their employers. The latter suggests that there was a reduction in the interlinkage of labor and insurance arrangements of the ultra-poor.
One of the emerging findings is that the program crowded out outside-village transfers. Unfortunately, I have limited information on the identify of outside village transfer sources/recipients. One important piece of information about outside-village transfers: I know if the transfers are given/received to/from the respondent's first-degree family members. 32 Moreover, at baseline, respondents were asked to classify the wealth status of their first-degree family members' households relative to their own (whether the family members are better-off, same or worse-off in terms of their wealth). I exploit this information to shed some light on the changes in transfers outside the village. First, note that a large share of the outside-village transfers consists of transfers from first-degree family members. In particular, 63% (81%) of the outside-village transfers received (given) by ultra-poor in the control group at midline/endline were from (to) their first-degree family members living outside the village. Second, I analyze the effects on outside-village transfers separately for family versus non-family transfers, Appendix Table S1 .9 displays the results. On the extensive margin, ultrapoor households were significantly less likely to be net receivers of transfers from outside the village and this seems to be driven mainly by non-family transfers. On the intensive margin, I find that the effects on within-family transfers display a similar pattern as outside-family transfers. Treated ultra-poor households received BDT 74 less in net transfers from their first-degree family members who live outside the village; and they received BDT 124 less from others. While the former is imprecisely estimated, the two effects are statistically not different from one another.
Next, I distinguish the intra-family transfers by the relative wealth of the family members at baseline. Appendix Table S1 .10 displays the effects on transfers from/to family members who were reported to be wealthier than the respondent's household at baseline in Panel A; and the transfers from/to family members whose wealth conditions were same or worse-off as the respondent's household at baseline. I find that treated households give significantly more transfers (in value) to their wealthier family members -the value of transfers given to wealthier family members is higher by BDT 6.3, which is a nearly 2-fold increase relative to the mean in the control group (BDT 2.6). This is in line with the effects on within-village transfer networks, where I showed that the ultra-poor were more likely to give transfers to wealthier households in the village. So, even though I do not have more detailed data to shed light on the full network outside the village, the effects within the first-degree family network are largely in line with what I find in terms of matching in within-village transfers.
As described in Section 2, the program entails a number of components which may affect ultra-poors' informal transfers and who they interact with in risk-sharing networks within the community. This paper evaluates the effects of the entire program package because the research design does not allow to isolate and contrast the impacts of specific program components. Disentangling these mechanisms is beyond the scope of the current paper. Nevertheless, I can exploit the variation in participation rates in various program components in order to shed some light on the role of various program components in crowding out of interhousehold transfers. Following Gelbach (2016), I decompose the overall ITT impacts into components explained by different potential mediators. The analysis provides useful suggestive evidence on which channels might contribute more significantly to the overall effects on transfers.
During the first 2 years of the program 86% of the ultra poor households participated in the enterprise support (which includes asset transfer, training and cash transfer) and all of them also received the encouragement to save. Hence, there is no independent variation I can explore to disentangle the mediating effects of these four components. On the other hand, 54% of the ultra poor received a sanitary latrine and/or tubewell, 34% received health support, 7% received help in paying schools fees and 30% received some other type of support (e.g. assistance with paying costs to transport livestock to/from the nearby market). After the first 2 years of the program were over and the treated ultra-poor households 'graduated' from the program, they were invited to participate in BRAC's mainstream microfinance program. 33% of the ultra-poor households in the treatment group ended up participating in BRAC microfinance. In addition to these components, which are directly implemented by BRAC, 15% of the ultra-poor households received some sort of support from the GDBC that were established in treatment villages.
Appendix Table S1 .11 displays the results of the mediation analysis. The first row in each panel replicates the baseline ITT estimates (specification 1). The second row estimates the same ITT specification but also controls for the mediators. The difference between these estimates corresponds to the total mediated effect, shown in the third row. The remaining rows then show how much each mediator contributes to explaining this mediated effect (assuming no complementarity between mediators). Three findings emerge: First, having received enterprise support from BRAC (which combines asset transfer, training, cash transfers and encouragement to save -since there is no independent variation in participation in these components) is a significant mediator for crowding-out of informal transfers, on both the extensive and the intensive margins. Second, having received health support from BRAC seems to crowd in informal transfers, at least on the intensive margin. Third, having microfinance loans from BRAC is another significant mediator that is associated with crowding out of informal transfers. The findings that enterprise support and microcredit access crowd out informal transfers is in line with the hypothesized effects of these components in Section 3. While the positive association between health support of the program and the crowding in of transfers may seem surprising, one explanation for this could be that households who need health support from BRAC possibly need and are more likely to receive support from their social networks as well. Healthcare costs can be rather high in this context and health expenses are likely to be prioritized over other types of needs by network members. While these results are intriguing, they are merely suggestive due to endogeneity of participation in the program components. Further research that opens up the black box of the program is needed to fully understand which components are driving the effects of this multi-faceted program on interhousehold transfers and to pin down the mechanisms behind these effects. 33
Previous studies evaluating the effects of public transfer programs on informal transfers have found relatively large crowding-out effects. Studying the effects of an increase in old-age pensions in South Africa, Jensen (2003) finds that a unit increase in the pension amount leads to a .25 to .30 reduction in private transfers. Juarez (2009) finds that an exogenous increase in the income of elderly in Mexico City (through a transfer program) led to a .33 reduction (per unit of public transfer) in private trans-fers. 34 Albarran and Attanasio (2002) evaluate the effects of a conditional cash transfer (CCT) program that was implemented in rural communities in Mexico ("Progresa"). They find that the grant, which had an average value of 250 pesos per household 35 reduced net transfers by 140 pesos per beneficiary household. 36 Angelucci et al. (2012) show that a CCT program implemented in urban Mexico ("Oppurtinades") had a very limited crowding-out effect on monetary transfer received, but reduced the likelihood of in-kind transfers significantly (they don't have data on the value of in-kind transfers). Relative to these estimates, the crowding-out effect I find is smaller. I find a fall of 13ppt in the likelihood of receiving transfers and BDT 152 decrease in the value of net informal transfers received by the average household that was eligible for the TUP program. This is low, relative to the value of assets transferred by the program (BDT 9500). It is perhaps more relevant to benchmark the crowding-out effect on informal transfers relative to the effect of the program on annual household consumption. When I estimate the effect of the program on consumption, using specification (1), I find that the program led to an increase of BDT 1136 in annual per capita consumption (p-value=0.000). The reduction in informal transfers is therefore small relative to the improvement in economic conditions of ultra-poor households caused by the program.
There are a number of possible explanations for the relatively small crowding-out effect I find on informal transfers. A key distinction between the TUP program and the programs in the aforementioned studies is the multi-faceted nature of the TUP program. As discussed in Section 3, many of these components may have opposing effects on interhousehold transfers, limiting the extent of crowding-out. Another key feature of the TUP program is that it is a one-off, big push intervention; while the transfer programs studied in previous work entail small but regular cash transfers. It is possible that access to continuing transfers are perceived differently by social networks of the beneficiaries, compared to a one-shot transfer, and therefore their crowding out effects are different. Moreover, the program I study targeted some of the poorest households in rural Bangladesh where out-migration is limited, especially for the poor (Bryan et al. (2014) ). In comparison, the households studied in previous work from South Africa or Mexico had greater access to migrant networks and remittances. Furthermore, the crowding out effect of CCT programs may be different due to the fact that these programs are conditional on investments in child education and health, whereas the TUP program did not entail such conditionalities. In light of this, a more relevant comparison may be with unconditional cash transfer (UCT) programs, but there is limited evidence on the long-term impacts of cash transfer programs in general (Haushofer and Shapiro (2018)), and on their effects on private transfers in particular. Evaluations of TUP and similar programs find improvements in the socio-economic statuses of targeted household which are sustained in the long-run (Bandiera et al. (2017) , Banerjee et al. ( 2016 )). To the extent that the long-term effects of UCT or CCT programs on the socio-economic statuses of targeted households differ from those of TUP-type programs, their impacts on private transfers and social networks of the beneficiaries are also likely to differ. Future research contrasting the effects of alternative transfer programs on private transfers is needed to shed light on this issue.
Faced with highly volatile earnings and limited access to credit and insurance markets, the poorest households in rural economies often rely on transfers from their social networks. It is important to understand how large-scale antipoverty programs targeting poor households within a village affect their access to informal transfers and the structure of transfer networks within targeted communities. 37 In this paper, I showed that a program that targeted ultra-poor households in rural communities in Bangladesh led to a small reduction in the level of private transfers they received. This crowding-out effect was driven mainly by a reduction in transfers they received from outside the village, while there was a small increase in transfers they received from their neighbors. The program enabled the ultra-poor households to exchange transfers with households from other, wealthier socio-economic classes within their communities. They were more likely to receive and give transfers from/to households who, at baseline, were in higher wealth classes relative to the ultra-poor. Finally, the program improved the reciprocity of ultra-poor households' transfer connections while reducing the likelihood that they receive transfers from their members' employers.
The findings show that poverty has a causal effect on households' participation in transfer networks and who they are matched with in reciprocal transfer arrangements. Moreover, the finding that the program reduces the likelihood of transfers from employers demonstrates an interlinkage between insurance and labor contracts, which is particularly relevant for poor workers with limited outside options. This implies that policies affecting either the labor or the insurance market are likely to have impact(s) on the other one. Evaluations of labor and insurance policies in village economies should take such interlinkages into account.
• 'Fraction of transfer sources within village' -fraction of households who are reported as sources of transfers (food or other) received by the respondent's household, who live within the same community as the respondent's household.
• 'Fraction of transfer recipients within village' -fraction of households who are reported as recipients of transfers (food or other) given by the respondent's household, who live within the same community as the respondent's household.
• 'Reciprocity of transfers within-village' -fraction of transfer sources within the village who are also reported as recipients of transfers (food or other).
• 'Reciprocity of transfers with ... ' -reciprocity of transfers with different wealth classes gives the fraction of transfer sources of a given wealth class within the village (conditional on having any) who are also reported as recipients of transfers.
• 'Received transfers from any employer' -a dummy variable equal to 1 if either the primary female respondent or the male head of the household is working for an employer who lives in the same community and is also reported as a source of transfers for the respondent's household. Graduation Refresher Training Refresher Training Refresher Training 0 Months 12 Months 24 Months Implementation start Healthcare Support Community Mobilization Implementation end Targeting Technical Skills Transfer Asset Transfer Consumption Allowance Savings Coaching Source: Adapted from http://www.brac.net/images/index/tup/brac_TUP-briefNote-Jun17.pdf Notes: The figure shows the typical timeline of BRAC's graduation program in Bangladesh. The specific timeline may vary depending on the local conditions, as well as beneficiary requirements. The dependent variable in column 1 is the fraction of transfer sources within the village who are also reported as recipients of transfers (of last 12 months' or food transfers ever) from the respondent's household. The dependent variables in columns 2 -5 are the fraction of ultra-poor, other poor, middle class or upper class households (respectivey) who are reported as sources of transfers (food, cash or other) and also reported as recipients of transfers given by the respondent's household. in column 1 is a dummy variable (DV) equal to 1 if either the main female or the male head of the household had worked (in the last 12 months) for an employer who lives in the same village and is reported as a source of transfers for the household. The dependent variable in column 2 (3) is a DV equal to 1 if the main female respondent (male head of the household) had worked (in the last 12 months) for an employer who lives in the same village and is reported as a source of transfers for the household. In Panel B, the sample is restricted to ultra-poor households where either the main female respondent or the male head of the household had worked for an employer in the 12 months preceding the survey.
Table S1 .
Treatment -0.015 -0.014 -0.014 -0.013 -0.012 -0.011 (0.013) (0.012) (0.011) (0.011) (0.011) (0.013) Received any transfers 0.023 0.012 (0.014) (0.018) Treatment × Received any transfers 0.010 0.009 (0.022) (0.030) Value of transfers received 0.032*** 0.026** (0.009) (0.012) Treatment × Value of transfers received -0.006 -0.007 (0.014) (0.018) Gave any transfers -0.045 -0.311** (0.040) (0.116) Treatment × Gave any transfers -0.024 -0.036 (0.050) (0.137) Value of transfers given -0.266 1.497* (0.346) (0.749) Treatment × Value of transfers given 0.468 0.565 (0.461) (0.995) Received any transfer from an employer -0.001 -0.003 (0.020) (0.020) Treatment × Received transfer from employer -0.024 -0.027 (0.025) (0.025) Attrition in control 0.162 0.162 0.162 0.162 0.162 0.162 F-test (p-value) 0.842 Adjusted R-squared 0.004 0.005 0.003 0.003 0.003 0.007 Observations 7953 7953 7953 7953 7953 7953
Source: Author's analysis based on original survey data.
The dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent has not been surveyed at midline and/or endline survey waves. The sample includes all ultra-poor households. All specifications control for subdistrict fixed effects, a dummy variable (DV) equal to 1 if the control variable is missing and the interaction of this DV with the treatment dummy. Standard errors are clustered at the BRAC branch office level (unit of randomization). 'Received any transfers' is a DV equal to 1 if the respondent's household received any transfers in cash or in kind during the 12 months preceding the survey. 'Gave any transfers' is a DV equal to 1 if the respondent's household gave any transfers in cash or in kind during the past 12 months. 'Value of transfers received (given)' is the monetary value of transfers received (given) by the respondents' household from (to) other households during the past 12 months; expressed in 1000s of Bangladeshi TAKAs, top 1% of outliers have been coded to missing. In 2007, 1USD=69BDT. 'Received transfers from any employer' is a dummy variable equal to 1 if either the female or the male respondent is working for an employer who lives in the same community and is also reported as a source of transfers for the respondent's household. In column (6), F-test gives the p-value associated with the null hypothesis that all interaction terms are jointly equal to zero. *** (**) (*) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) (10%) level.
Table S1 .2: COMPARISON OF SOCIO-ECONOMIC CLASSES Ultra poor (UP) Other poor (OP) Middle class (M) Upper class (R) UP vs. OP UP vs. M UP vs. R OP vs. M OP vs. R M vs. R (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) A. Socio-economic Status: Wealth (BDT) 5850.98 14544.02 152293.69 841129.07 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 (30655.60) (72425.83) (315650.26) (964643.22) Consumption (BDT) 9829.35 10127.50 12205.72 20664.38 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 (4518.74) (4771.70) (7112.22) (36441.19) Literacy 0.07 0.17 0.27 0.51 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 (0.26) (0.37) (0.44) (0.50) Height (cm) 148.71 149.13 149.82 150.13 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .018 (5.37) (5.32) (5.14) (5.07) B. Informal Transfers Received: Received any transfers during last year 0.22 0.22 0.16 0.22 .945 .000 .723 .000 .684 .000 (0.41) (0.41) (0.37) (0.41) Value of transfers received (BDT) 270.08 328.30 513.29 3097.03 .137 .000 .000 .001 .000 .000 (1798.85) (2708.87) (4081.52) (29555.99) Ever receives food 0.92 0.92 0.83 0.42 .389 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 (0.27) (0.26) (0.38) (0.49) Number of food transfer sources 2.17 2.24 1.94 0.90 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 (0.95) (0.95) (1.11) (1.17) Fraction of transfer sources within village 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.70 .769 .441 .000 .608 .000 .000 (0.24) (0.24) (0.26) (0.41) C. Informal Transfers Given: Gave any transfers during last year 0.02 0.03 0.09 0.21 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 (0.14) (0.18) (0.28) (0.41) Value of transfers given (BDT) 45.20 62.69 251.40 691.21 .387 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 (1044.62) (1323.43) (2993.95) (4273.22) Ever gives food 0.44 0.54 0.73 0.81 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 (0.52) (0.50) (0.45) (0.39) Number of food transfer recipients 1.00 1.27 1.70 1.91 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 (1.24) (1.30) (1.21) (1.13) Fraction of transfer recipients within village 0.95 0.94 0.92 0.87 .054 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 (0.18) (0.19) (0.67) (0.26) D. Reciprocity: Reciprocity of transfers within-village 0.42 0.50 0.67 0.80 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 (0.44) (0.44) (0.42) (0.35) Received transfer from an employer 0.10 0.08 0.03 0.00 .001 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 (0.30) (0.28) (0.16) (0.00) Observations 6,732 7,340 6,742 2,215 Source: Author's analysis based on original survey data. Notes: The sample includes observations from the baseline survey. The sample is restricted to ultra-poor households in column 1, other poor households in column 2, middle class households in column 3 and upper class households in column 4. For variable definitions, see section 8. All monetary values are in Bangladeshi TAKAs. In 2007, 1USD=69BDT. Columns 5-10 report p-values for the equality of means across the four wealth classes (based on one-sided t-tests).
Table S1.3: CORRELATIONS BETWEEN HAVING TRANSFERS FROM EMPLOYERS AND TERMS OF LABOR CONTRACTS Women's labor contracts: Men's labor contracts: Hourly Range of Range / Hourly Range of Range / wage wage income hourly wage wage wage income hourly wage (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Interlinked contract -0.277*** -88.121* -8.370 -0.705*** -101.017 -0.947 (0.099) (47.645) (8.051) (0.154) (74.337) (8.341) Observations 6358 6358 6358 7988 7984 7984 Mean level of outcome 5.743 1218.879 221.179 9.643 2271.537 252.602 Adjusted R-squared 0.217 0.113 0.067 0.268 0.074 0.073 Source: Author's analysis based on original survey data.
The table reports baseline correlations between having received transfers from employers and contract terms (wage per hour and volatility (range) of monthly wage earnings). 'Received transfers from an employer' is a dummy variable equal to 1 if respondent is working for an employer who lives in the same community and who is also reported as a source of transfers for the respondent's household. Sample includes baseline observations from ultra-poor and non-ultra-poor households. Each observation is weighted using sampling weights calculated as the fraction of households surveyed from each wealth class (lower, middle and upper) relative to the number of households from the relevant wealth class in the community census. Columns 1 -3 refer to terms of labor contracts of primary female in the household and columns 4 -6 refer to terms of labor contracts of the male household head. All regressions control for the following characteristics of the relevant individual [primary female in columns 1 -3 and male household head in columns 3 -6] : whether the individual is literate, individual's age (in years) and age squared, total household wealth (in BDT) and female respondent's height (in centimeters) -male respondent's height was not available, thus we control for female respondent's height as a proxy. In columns 1 and 4, the dependent variable is wage per hour (in BDT), which is the sum of earnings from wage labor divided by hours spent in wage-labor during the year preceding the survey. In columns 2 and 5, the dependent variable is the range of monthly wage earnings, which is the difference between the maximum and minimum monthly earnings of the respondent from wage employment during the year preceding the survey. In columns 3 and 6, Ithe dependent variable is the range of monthly wage earnings divided by the wage per hour (in BDT). In 2007, 1USD=69BDT. *** (**) (*) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) (10%) level.
Table S1 .4: BASELINE BALANCING
Treatment Group Control Group Difference Mean SD N Mean SD N t-test Normalized (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) A. Socio-economic Status: Wealth (BDT) 5373.04 20145.37 4,045 6570.46 41750.82 2,687 0.449 -0.026 Consumption (BDT) 9921.14 4411.00 3,822 9687.54 4677.66 2,474 0.552 0.036 Literacy 0.07 0.26 4,023 0.07 0.25 2,675 0.624 0.017 Height (cm) 148.72 5.36 3,773 148.70 5.39 2,456 0.941 0.002 B. Informal Transfers Received: Received any transfers during last year 0.20 0.40 4,045 0.25 0.43 2,687 0.251 -0.090 Value of transfers received (BDT) 223.97 1189.77 4,045 339.49 2443.29 2,687 0.260 -0.043 Ever receives food 0.93 0.26 4,043 0.91 0.28 2,687 0.659 0.028 Number of food transfer sources 2.11 0.93 4,045 2.27 0.96 2,687 0.159 -0.126 Fraction of transfer sources within village 0.90 0.23 3,798 0.86 0.26 2,523 0.141 0.102 C. Informal Transfers Given: Gave any transfers during last year 0.02 0.14 4,045 0.02 0.14 2,687 0.716 -0.010 Value of transfers given (BDT) 34.72 734.69 4,045 60.97 1386.18 2,687 0.465 -0.017 Ever gives food 0.46 0.50 4,043 0.41 0.49 2,687 0.471 0.064 Number of food transfer recipients 1.02 1.22 4,045 0.98 1.26 2,687 0.822 0.021 Fraction of transfer recipients within village 0.96 0.17 1,867 0.94 0.20 1,123 0.247 0.061 D. Reciprocity: Reciprocity of transfers within-village 0.43 0.44 3,711 0.41 0.44 2,442 0.677 0.033 Reciprocity with ultra-poor HH's 0.65 0.47 882 0.57 0.49 303 0.213 0.119 Reciprocity with other poor HH's 0.54 0.49 1,271 0.51 0.49 922 0.537 0.052 Reciprocity with middle class HH's 0.36 0.46 2,584 0.36 0.46 1,831 0.985 -0.002 Reciprocity with upper class HH's 0.12 0.32 774 0.18 0.37 662 0.195 -0.109 Received transfer from an employer 0.10 0.30 4,045 0.10 0.30 2,687 0.920 0.004 E. Likelihood of transfers from/to other wealth classes: Received any transfers from... ... other poor 0.31 0.46 4,045 0.34 0.47 2,687 0.389 -0.043 ... middle class 0.64 0.48 4,045 0.68 0.47 2,687 0.204 -0.063 ... upper class 0.19 0.39 4,045 0.25 0.43 2,687 0.015 -0.095 Gave any transfers to... ... other poor 0.22 0.41 4,045 0.22 0.41 2,687 0.976 -0.002 ... middle class 0.28 0.45 4,045 0.29 0.45 2,687 0.807 -0.019 ... upper class 0.02 0.15 4,045 0.04 0.20 2,687 0.053 -0.079 Source: Author's analysis based on original survey data. Notes: The sample includes observations from the baseline survey and is limited to ultra-poor households. Columns 1,2,3 (4,5,6) give the mean, strandard deviation and number of observations respectively for the relevant variable in treatment (control) communities. Column 7 reports the p-value for the test of equality of treatment and control samples' means with the standard errors clustered at the branch office level (unit of randomization); column 8 reports normalized differences computed as the difference in means in treatment and control observations divided by the square root of the sum of the variances. For variable definitions, see section 8. All monetary values are in Bangladeshi TAKAs. In 2007, 1USD=69BDT.
Table S1.5: ULTRA-POOR'S FOOD TRANSFERS WITH THEIR BASELINE NETWORK (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Fraction of baseline food transfer Fraction of baseline food transfer sources from whom transfers... recipients to whom transfers... decreased unchanged increased decreased unchanged increased Treatment -0.003 0.034 -0.031** -0.053 0.065 -0.012 (0.036) (0.035) (0.014) (0.050) (0.050) (0.008) Mean in control 0.398 0.514 0.088 0.506 0.457 0.038 Adjusted R-squared 0.048 0.053 0.053 0.131 0.140 0.085 Observations 12180 12180 12180 3077 3077 3077 Source: Author's analysis based on original survey data. Notes: The table reports ITT estimates based on specification (1) estimated with OLS. The sample includes observations from ultra-poor households surveyed at the midline and endline surveys. All specifications control for survey wave and subdistrict (strata) fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the BRAC branch office level (unit of randomization). The dependent variable in column 1 (2) is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the amount of food transfers received from the baseline food transfer sources decreased (increased) at midline/endline. The dependent variable in column 3 (4) is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the amount of food transfers given to baseline food transfer recipients decreased (increased) at midline/endline.
Table S1.6: EFFECTS ON MATCHING, HETEROGENEITY BY BASELINE CONNECTIONS Reported by : Ultra-Poor Households Non-Ultra-Poor Households (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) Panel A: Sample of Households Giving Transfers to Ultra-Poor at Baseline ultra other middle upper other middle upper poor poor class class poor class class Treatment 0.107*** 0.097*** 0.079*** 0.114*** 0.121*** 0.089*** 0.074*** (0.026) (0.024) (0.023) (0.027) (0.031) (0.023) (0.025) Mean in control 0.497 0.509 0.501 0.241 0.558 0.384 0.126 Adj. R-squared 0.232 0.215 0.241 0.198 0.334 0.427 0.223 Observations 2370 4386 8828 2872 1296 978 510 Panel B: Sample of Households Not Giving Transfers to Ultra-Poor at Baseline ultra other middle upper other middle upper poor poor class class poor class class Treatment 0.026*** 0.007 0.024 -0.001 0.028*** 0.020*** 0.004 (0.006) (0.011) (0.019) (0.003) (0.006) (0.004) (0.003) Mean in control 0.059 0.117 0.164 0.024 0.048 0.026 0.005 Adj. R-squared 0.102 0.104 0.058 0.019 0.269 0.130 0.080 Observations 11094 9078 4636 10592 13384 12506 3920 Source: Author's analysis based on original survey data. Notes: The table reports ITT estimates based on specification (1) estimated with OLS. In columns 1-4, the sample includes observations from ultra-poor households; while in columns 5-7 non-ultra-poor households. In particular, the sample in column 5 includes other poor, in column 6 middle class and in column 7 upper class households. All specifications control for the baseline level of the outcome, survey wave and subdistrict (strata) fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the BRAC branch office level (unit of randomization). *** (**) (*) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) (10%) level. The dependent variables in columns 1, 2, 3 and 4 are dummy variables equal to 1 if the respondent reported that her household gave any transfers to any ultra-poor, other poor, middle class or upper class households (within her community) respectively; in columns 4, 5 and 6 (where the sample is limited to non-ultra-poor households) the dependent variables are dummies equal to 1 if the respondent's household received any transfers from any ultra poor households (within her community). In Panel A, the sample is restricted to households who had at baseline reported giving transfers to at least one ultra-poor household within their community; in Panel B the sample includes households who did not report any ultra-poor household as a recipient of transfers.
Table S1.7: EFFECTS ON LABOR SUPPLY IN ULTRA-POOR HOUSEHOLDS Either respondent Women's labor Men's labor works for hours in works for hours in works for hours in a wage wage-labor a wage wage-labor a wage wage-labor (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Treatment -0.082*** -433.971*** -0.101*** -235.044*** -0.017 -67.471** (0.015) (44.818) (0.013) (24.954) (0.013) (30.639) Mean in control 0.702 1614.405 0.589 764.414 0.430 692.373 Adjusted R-squared 0.170 0.195 0.262 0.257 0.140 0.135 Observations 13464 13464 13464 13464 7778 7778 Source: Author's analysis based on original survey data. Notes: The table reports ITT estimates based on specification (1) estimated with OLS. *** (**) (*) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) (10%)
level. The dependent variable in column 1 is a dummy variable (DV) equal to 1 if either the main female respondent, or the male head of the household was engaged in income generating activity where s/he was employed by others during the 12 months preceding the survey. 'Hours in wage-labor' gives the total annual hours the respondent spent in wage employment, where annual hours are computed by multiplying the number of hours worked in a typical day by the number of days worked in a year for each wage labor activity and then summing across all wage labor activities. The dependent variable in column 2 is the sum of the hours spent by the main female and the male head of the household in wage-labor. Outcome variables in columns 3-4 (5-6) refer to the main female (male head of the household).
Table S1 .8: EFFECTS ON INTERHOUSEHOLD LOANS Credit received Credit given Net credit received (Yes=1) (BDT) (Yes=1) (BDT) (Yes=1) (BDT) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Treatment -0.020 -378.141* 0.046*** 553.392*** -0.027 -954.619*** (0.019) (207.860) (0.006) (80.279) (0.018) (263.890) Mean in control 0.224 1130.131 0.028 224.281 0.218 905.850 Adjusted R-squared 0.096 0.034 0.021 0.012 0.088 0.012 Observations 13464 13464 13464 13464 13464 13464 Panel B: Loans within the village Treatment -0.013 -90.552* 0.017*** 192.035*** -0.014 -281.826*** (0.008) (50.925) (0.003) (32.899) (0.008) (65.304) Mean in control 0.068 237.230 0.013 74.133 0.068 163.096 Adjusted R-squared 0.026 0.012 0.010 0.008 0.025 0.007 Observations 13464 13464 13464 13464 13464 13464 Panel C: Loans outside the village Treatment -0.011 -289.012* 0.031*** 362.863*** -0.016 -675.220*** (0.015) (163.245) (0.004) (52.772) (0.014) (203.455) Mean in control 0.179 892.901 0.018 150.147 0.177 742.753 Adjusted R-squared 0.081 0.026 0.013 0.008 0.077 0.009 Observations 13464 13464 13464 13464 13464 13464 Source: Author's analysis based on original survey data. Notes: The table reports ITT estimates based on specification (1) estimated with OLS. The sample includes observations from ultra-poor households surveyed at the midline and endline surveys. All specifications control for the baseline level of the outcome, survey wave and subdistrict (strata) fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the BRAC branch office level (unit of randomization). All monetary values are measured in Bangladeshi Takas, deflated to 2007 prices using the annual CPI index published by the Bank of Bangladesh. In 2007, 1USD=69BDT nominal and 1USD=18.5BDT at PPP. *** (**) (*) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) (10%) level. The dependent variable in Panel A, column 1 is a dummy variable (DV) equal to 1 if the respondent's household received any loans from another household during the 12 months preceding the survey; in column 2 it is the monetary value of loans received during the past 12 months; in column 3 it is a DV equal to 1 if the respondent's household gave any loans to another household during the past 12 months; in column 4 it is the monetary value of all loans given by the respondent's household during the last 12 months; in column 5 it is a DV equal to 1 if the respondent's household was a net loan receiver in the past 12 months; in column 6 it is the monetary value of loans received minus loans given by the respondent's household in the past 12 months. All dependent variables in Panel B (C) are identical to those in Panel A, except they refer to within (outside) village informal loans. Table S1.11: MEDIATION ANALYSIS ON NET TRANSFERS RECEIVED Extensive Intensive margin margin (Yes=1) (BDT) (1) (2) 1. Baseline ITT impact -0.131*** -151.721** (0.019) (74.478) 2. Unrestricted Estimate (includes mediators as controls) -0.104*** 167.599 (0.024) (184.197) 3. Total Mediated Effect (difference between ITT and unrestricted effect) -0.027** -319.319* (0.013) (188.647) 4. Mediator: received enterprise support from BRAC -0.043** -425.316** (0.016) (211.314) 5. Mediator: received sanitary latrine or tubewell from BRAC 0.008 4.063 (0.009) (56.664) 6. Mediator: received health support from BRAC -0.001 136.057** (0.006) (55.779) 7. Mediator: received education support from BRAC -0.001 4.104 (0.001) (4.715) 8. Mediator: received other support from BRAC 0.007 25.580 (0.006) (37.423) 9. Mediator: received help from GDBC committee 0.005 -3.210 (0.003) (17.737) 10. Mediator: received microcredit from BRAC -0.002 -60.597** (0.004) (29.875) Source: Author's analysis based on original survey data. Notes: The table shows the results from mediation analysis following Gelbach (2016). In each panel, the first row shows the ITT impact based on specification (1) estimated with OLS, corresponding to the estimates in Table 3 (in the paper) columns 5 and 6. The second row shows the ITT impact once the mediators are controlled for?these are having received enterprise support (asset, training and cash transfer) from BRAC, having received any other type of support from BRAC (e.g. health or education support, sanitary latrine, tubewell), having received sanitary latrinne or tubewell from BRAC, having received health support from BRAC (for medical care of any household member), having received any help with school expenses from BRAC, having received any help with transportation costs from BRAC, having received any support from the GDBC (Village Poverty Alleviation) committee and having received any microcredit from BRAC. Row 3 shows the total mediated effect, and rows 4 -10 show the contribution of each mediator. The sample includes observations from ultra-poor households surveyed at the midline and endline surveys. All specifications control for the baseline level of the outcome, survey wave and subdistrict (strata) fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the BRAC branch office level (unit of randomization). All monetary values are measured in Bangladeshi Takas, deflated to 2007 prices using the annual CPI index published by the Bank of Bangladesh. In 2007, 1USD=69BDT nominal and 1USD=18.5BDT at PPP. *** (**) (*) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) (10%) level. The dependent variable in column 1 is a dummy variable (DV) equal to 1 if the respondent's household was a net transfer receiver in the past 12 months; in column 2 it is the monetary value of transfers received minus transfers made by the respondent's household in the past 12 months.
Table S2.1: EFFECTS ON INFORMAL TRANSFERS OF ULTRA-POOR HOUSEHOLDS Transfers received Transfers given Net transfers received in past 12 months in past 12 months in past 12 months (Yes=1) (BDT) (Yes=1) (BDT) (Yes=1) (BDT) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Treatment -0.127*** -39.352 0.003 20.821 -0.129*** -66.353 (0.037) (106.079) (0.016) (78.595) (0.035) (95.392) Treatment × Endline -0.004 -130.624 0.017 40.111 -0.004 -170.735 (0.063) (245.323) (0.028) (116.845) (0.057) (192.236) Mean in control 0.497 783.055 0.059 143.978 0.484 639.076 Adjusted R-squared 0.126 0.027 0.030 0.001 0.120 0.019 Observations 13464 13464 13464 13464 13464 13464 Panel B: Transfers within the village Treatment -0.049** 55.780** -0.004 -7.351 -0.048** 63.323** (0.019) (27.359) (0.006) (7.839) (0.019) (29.878) Treatment × Endline 0.025 -29.068 0.007 6.462 0.022 -35.529 (0.026) (49.401) (0.009) (9.203) (0.025) (51.095) Mean in control 0.148 142.403 0.015 11.865 0.147 130.538 Adjusted R-squared 0.041 0.004 0.014 0.001 0.041 0.003 Observations 13464 13464 13464 13464 13464 13464 Panel C: Transfers outside the village Treatment -0.119*** -94.086 0.004 28.196 -0.119*** -130.179 (0.034) (92.347) (0.013) (77.689) (0.032) (84.062) Treatment × Endline -0.008 -101.556 0.014 33.650 -0.007 -135.206 (0.057) (216.646) (0.022) (118.138) (0.052) (164.083) Mean in control 0.430 640.652 0.048 132.113 0.420 508.539 Adjusted R-squared 0.117 0.027 0.023 0.000 0.112 0.018 Observations 13464 13464 13464 13464 13464 13464 Source: Author's analysis based on original survey data. Notes: The table reports ITT estimates based on specification (2) estimated with OLS. The sample includes observations from ultra-poor households surveyed at the midline and endline surveys. All specifications control for the baseline level of the outcome, survey wave and subdistrict (strata) fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the BRAC branch office level (unit of randomization). All monetary values are measured in Bangladeshi Takas, deflated to 2007 prices using the annual CPI index published by the Bank of Bangladesh. In 2007, 1USD=69BDT. *** (**) (*) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) (10%) level. The dependent variable in Panel A, column 1 is a dummy variable (DV) equal to 1 if the respondent's household received any transfers (in cash or in kind) from another household during the 12 months preceding the survey; in column 2 it is the monetary value of transfers received during the past 12 months; in column 3 it is a DV equal to 1 if the respondent's household gave any transfers to another household during the past 12 months; in column 4 it is the monetary value of all transfers given by the respondent's household during the last 12 months; in column 6 it is a DV equal to 1 if the respondent's household was a net transfer receiver in the past 12 months; in column 6 it is the monetary value of transfers received minus transfers made by the respondent's household in the past 12 months. All dependent variables in Panel B (C) are identical to those in Panel A, except they refer to within (outside) village transfers.
Table S2.2: EFFECTS ON FOOD TRANSFERS OF ULTRA-POOR HOUSEHOLDS Transfers received Transfers given (Yes=1) (No.) (Yes=1) (No.) (1) (2) (3) (4) Treatment 0.013 0.037 0.048* 0.152* (0.010) (0.065) (0.027) (0.078) Treatment × Endline 0.000 0.120 0.041 0.153 (0.017) (0.098) (0.040) (0.126) Mean in control 0.936 2.340 0.560 1.284 Adjusted R-squared 0.069 0.170 0.260 0.315 Observations 13464 13464 13453 13464 Panel B: Within-village Transfers Treatment 0.015 0.059 0.045 0.147* (0.011) (0.063) (0.027) (0.075) Treatment × Endline 0.010 0.155 0.046 0.160 (0.021) (0.099) (0.040) (0.123) Mean in control 0.907 2.199 0.547 1.236 Adjusted R-squared 0.078 0.194 0.259 0.318 Observations 13464 13464 13464 13464 Panel C: Outside-village Transfers Treatment -0.012 -0.017 -0.001 0.003 (0.014) (0.019) (0.006) (0.008) Treatment × Endline -0.031 -0.034 -0.004 -0.007 (0.022) (0.031) (0.010) (0.014) Mean in control 0.107 0.141 0.037 0.047 Adjusted R-squared 0.066 0.074 0.037 0.036 Observations 13464 13464 13464 13464 Source: Author's analysis based on original survey data. Notes: The table reports ITT estimates based on specification (2) estimated with OLS. The sample includes observations from ultra-poor households surveyed at the midline and endline surveys. All specifications control for the baseline level of the outcome, survey wave and subdistrict (strata) fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the BRAC branch office level (unit of randomization). *** (**) (*) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) (10%) level. The dependent variable in column 1 is a dummy variable (DV) equal to 1 if the respondent's household ever receives any food transfers from other households The dependent variable in Panel A, column 1 is a dummy variable (DV) equal to 1 if the respondent's household ever receives any food transfers; in column 2 it is the number of households (capped at 3) that the respondent's household receives food transfers from; in column 3 it is a DV equal to 1 if the respondent's household ever gives food transfers to other households; in column 4 it is the number of households (capped at 3) that the respondent's households gives food transfers to. All dependent variables in Panel B (C) are identical to those in Panel A, except they refer to within (outside) village food transfers.
Table S2.3: EFFECTS ON MATCHING IN TRANSFER NETWORKS (1) (2) (3) (4) Panel A: Transfers received by Ultra-Poor Households from ... ultra poor other poor middle class upper class Treatment 0.048*** 0.022 0.008 -0.009 (0.008) (0.014) (0.015) (0.010) Treatment × Endline 0.018 0.027 0.019 0.002 (0.013) (0.018) (0.023) (0.013) Mean in control 0.128 0.345 0.701 0.260 Adj. R-squared 0.439 0.415 0.327 0.407 Observations 13464 13464 13464 13464 Panel B: Transfers given by Ultra-Poor Households to ... ultra poor other poor middle class upper class Treatment 0.047*** 0.021 0.030 0.005 (0.011) (0.014) (0.020) (0.007) Treatment × Endline 0.010 0.022 0.048 0.023* (0.015) (0.026) (0.031) (0.012) Mean in control 0.108 0.252 0.394 0.078 Adj. R-squared 0.368 0.306 0.255 0.145 Observations 13464 13464 13464 13464 Source: Author's analysis based on original survey data. Notes: The table reports ITT estimates based on specification (1) estimated with OLS. The sample includes observations from ultra-poor households. All specifications control for the baseline level of the outcome, survey wave and subdistrict (strata) fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the BRAC branch office level (unit of randomization). *** (**) (*) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) (10%) level. In Panel A, the dependent variables in columns 1, 2, 3 and 4 are dummy variables equal to 1 if the respondent reported that her household received any transfers from any ultra-poor, other poor, middle class or upper class households (within her community) respectively. In Panel B, the dependent variables in columns 1, 2, 3 and 4 are dummy variables equal to 1 if the respondent reported that her household gave any transfers to any ultra-poor, other poor, middle class or upper class households (within her community) respectively.
Table S2.4: EFFECTS ON MATCHING, REPORTED BY NON-ULTRA-POOR HOUSEHOLDS (1) (2) (3) (4) Transfers received by Non-Ultra-Poor from ... ultra other middle upper poor poor class class Panel A1: Pooled Treatment 0.018*** 0.009 -0.010 -0.010 (0.004) (0.009) (0.012) (0.008) Treatment × Endline 0.009* 0.005 0.020 0.005 (0.005) (0.011) (0.018) (0.012) Panel A2: By Wealth Class Treatment 0.038*** 0.004 0.003 0.010 (0.007) (0.014) (0.013) (0.011) Treatment × Endline 0.001 0.006 0.000 -0.005 (0.008) (0.018) (0.016) (0.013) Differential effect by endline for middle class 0.012 0.004 0.020 0.006 (0.008) (0.016) (0.019) (0.016) Differential effect by endline for uppper class 0.016 0.002 0.027 0.047** (0.010) (0.019) (0.030) (0.022) Treatment effect for middle class 0.019 0.008 -0.005 -0.001 (0.006) (0.009) (0.014) (0.009) Treatment effect for upper class 0.004 -0.001 -0.039 -0.062 (0.005) (0.011) (0.029) (0.024) Control mean 0.062 0.319 0.691 0.279 Mean for other poor 0.085 0.448 0.711 0.272 Mean for middle class 0.048 0.224 0.770 0.261 Mean for upper class 0.017 0.128 0.385 0.360 Observations 32594 32594 32594 32594 Transfers given by Non-Ultra-Poor to ... ultra other middle upper poor poor class class Panel B1: Pooled Treatment 0.025*** -0.014 -0.019 -0.016 (0.007) (0.013) (0.020) (0.009) Treatment × Endline -0.001 0.006 0.016 0.028* (0.008) (0.016) (0.025) (0.014) Panel B2: By Wealth Class Treatment 0.030*** -0.008 -0.013 -0.013 (0.009) (0.017) (0.022) (0.010) Treatment × Endline 0.002 0.012 0.003 0.015 (0.009) (0.024) (0.026) (0.011) Differential effect by endline for middle class -0.001 -0.009 0.012 0.011 (0.011) (0.021) (0.026) (0.015) Differential effect by endline for uppper class 0.001 -0.006 0.017 0.028 (0.015) (0.026) (0.031) (0.024) Treatment effect for middle class 0.026 -0.014 -0.026 -0.014 (0.008) (0.013) (0.024) (0.010) Treatment effect for upper class 0.015 -0.030 -0.010 -0.016 (0.015) (0.021) (0.026) (0.018) Control mean 0.078 0.338 0.600 0.177 Mean for other poor 0.084 0.397 0.507 0.119 Mean for middle class 0.065 0.268 0.721 0.182 Mean for upper class 0.091 0.329 0.584 0.373 Observations 32594 32594 32594 32594 Source: Author's analysis based on original survey data. Notes: The table reports ITT estimates based on specification (2), with the addition of indicators for wealth classes and their interactions with treatment and endline indicators, estimated with OLS. The sample includes observations from non-ultrapoor households. All specifications control for the baseline level of the outcome, survey wave and subdistrict (strata) fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the BRAC branch office level (unit of randomization). *** (**) (*) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) (10%) level. In Panel A, the dependent variables in columns 1, 2, 3 and 4 are dummy variables equal to 1 if the respondent reported that her household received any transfers from any ultra-poor, other poor, middle class or upper class households (within her community) respectively. In Panel B, the dependent variables in columns 1, 2, 3 and 4 are dummy variables equal to 1 if the respondent reported that her household gave any transfers to any ultra-poor, other poor, middle class or upper class households (within her community) respectively. In the pooled regressions (Panels A1 and B1) each observation is weighted using sampling weights calculated as the fraction of households surveyed from each wealth class (lower, middle and upper) relative to the number of households from the relevant wealth class in the community census.
Table S2.5: EFFECTS ON RECIPROCITY OF TRANSFERS, BY WEALTH CLASS Reciprocity Reciprocity of transfers with of transfer ultra other middle upper links poor poor class class (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) Treatment 0.032 0.005 0.069*** 0.040 0.049 (0.021) (0.033) (0.024) (0.025) (0.031) Treatment × Endline 0.089** 0.079* 0.051 0.094** 0.142*** (0.035) (0.041) (0.044) (0.039) (0.048) Mean in control 0.510 0.627 0.560 0.449 0.267 Adjusted R-squared 0.219 0.190 0.208 0.237 0.198 Observations 12774 2792 4823 9474 3135 Source: Author's analysis based on original survey data. Notes: The table reports ITT estimates based on specification (2) estimated with OLS. The sample includes observations from ultra-poor households surveyed at the midline and endline surveys. All specifications control for the baseline level of the outcome, survey wave and subdistrict (strata) fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the BRAC branch office level (unit of randomization). *** (**) (*) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) (10%) level. The dependent variable in column 1 is the fraction of transfer sources within the village who are also reported as recipients of transfers (of last 12 months' or food transfers ever) from the respondent's household. The dependent variables in columns 2 -5 are the fraction of ultra-poor, other poor, middle class or upper class households (respectivey) who are reported as sources of transfers (food, cash or other) and also reported as recipients of transfers given by the respondent's household. Table S2.6: TRANSFERS FROM EMPLOYERS Household received Main female respondent Male head of HH transfers from received transfers received transfers any employer from an employer from an employer (1) (2) (3) Treatment -0.044*** -0.040*** -0.015** (0.011) (0.010) (0.007) Treatment effect after 4 years 0.011 0.010 0.004 (0.017) (0.015) (0.012) Mean in control 0.091 0.081 0.032 Adjusted R-squared 0.068 0.059 0.039 Observations 13464 13464 7778 Panel B: Sample of wage-workers in all 3 surveys Treatment -0.052*** -0.044** -0.010 (0.018) (0.021) (0.020) Treatment effect after 4 years 0.023 0.036 -0.019 (0.026) (0.025) (0.038) Mean in control 0.133 0.138 0.073 Adjusted R-squared 0.079 0.071 0.077 Observations 6336 4488 1332 Source: Author's analysis based on original survey data. Notes: The table reports ITT estimates based on specification (2) estimated with OLS. The sample includes observations from ultra-poor households surveyed at the midline and endline surveys. All specifications control for the baseline level of the outcome, survey wave and subdistrict (strata) fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the BRAC branch office level (unit of randomization). *** (**) (*) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) (10%) level.
The dependent variable in column 1 is a dummy variable (DV) equal to 1 if either the main female or the male head of the household had worked (in the last 12 months) for an employer who lives in the same village and is reported as a source of transfers for the household. The dependent variable in column 2 (3) is a DV equal to 1 if the main female respondent (male head of the household) had worked (in the last 12 months) for an employer who lives in the same village and is reported as a source of transfers for the household. In Panel B, the sample is restricted to ultra-poor households where either the main female respondent or the male head of the household had worked for an employer in the 12 months preceding the survey.
Source: Author's analysis based on original survey data.
Notes: The sample includes observations from the baseline survey. In column 1, the sample is restricted to ultra-poor households; in column 2, to other poor households; in column 3, to middle class households; and in column 4 to upper class households.
Source:
Author's analysis based on original survey data. Notes:
Source:
Author's analysis based on original survey data. Notes:
Source: Author's analysis based on original survey data. Notes: The table reports ITT estimates based on specification (1) estimated with OLS. The sample includes observations from ultra-poor households. All specifications control for the baseline level of the outcome, survey wave and subdistrict (strata) fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the BRAC branch office level (unit of randomization). *** (**) (*) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) (10%) level.
dummy variables equal to 1 if the respondent reported that her household received any transfers from any ultra-poor, other poor, middle class or upper class households (within her community) respectively. In Panel B, the dependent variables in columns 1, 2, 3 and 4 are dummy variables equal to 1 if the respondent reported that her household gave any transfers to any ultra-poor, other poor, middle class or upper class households (within her community) respectively. In the pooled regressions (Panels A1 and B1) each observation is weighted using sampling weights calculated as the fraction of households surveyed from each wealth class (lower, middle and upper) relative to the number of households from the relevant wealth class in the community census.
Source:
Author's analysis based on original survey data. Notes:
Source: Author's analysis based on original survey data. Notes: The table reports ITT estimates based on specification (1) estimated with OLS. The sample includes observations from ultra-poor households surveyed at the midline and endline surveys. All specifications control for the baseline level of the outcome, survey wave and subdistrict (strata) fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the BRAC branch office level (unit of randomization). *** (**) (*) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) (10%) level.
Source: Author's analysis based on original survey data. Notes: The table reports ITT estimates based on specification (1) estimated with OLS. The sample includes observations from ultra-poor households surveyed at the midline and endline surveys. All specifications control for the baseline level of the outcome, survey wave and subdistrict (strata) fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the BRAC branch office level (unit of randomization). *** (**) (*) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) (10%) level. The dependent variable
Households who were in the poor class according to the community wealth appraisal, but not selected as potential beneficiaries of the program by BRAC are referred to as the "other poor" households throughout the paper.
This procedure is similar to community appraisal methods studied by Alatas et al (2012) in Indonesia.
In particular, the program has three exclusion criteria, all of which are binding. Households who are borrowing from an NGO providing microfinance, who are recipients of any government benefits or who do not have any able-to-work adult female members are excluded from the program. To be selected, a household has to satisfy three of the following five inclusion criteria: (i) total land owned including homestead is no more than 10 decimals (approximately 0.1 acre); (ii) there is no adult male income earner in the household; (iii) adult women in the household work outside the homestead; (iv) school-going-aged children are working in an income-generating activity; and (v) the household has no productive assets.
Eligibility is determined at the household, rather than at the individual level. The program targets the leading woman (female head of household) in eligible households as the person in charge of the
More generally, the idea that a risk-neutral employer may provide a risk-averse worker with insurance against income fluctuations is not only limited to the rural labor market (Knight (1921) , Baily (1974), Azariadis (1975)).
The districts and communities in which the data was collected were determined by BRAC, as part of their aim to identify the poorest parts of the country. See Bandiera et al. (2017) for details.
Whether the sender/recipient of the transfer resided in the same village (as the respondent's household), different village/town in the same district, different district or outside Bangladesh
One distinction between the food transfer questions and the larger transfer transactions is the former captures not only the realization of transfers in a given period but also the most relevant potential transfer links. Therefore, by construction, the information on food transfers only captures the identity while the latter includes information on both the value of the transfers and the identity of the transfer sender/recipient. Whenever I estimate the effects on realized transfer transactions and their values, I use only the information from the latter. On the other hand, whenever I estimate the effects on network characteristics (such as the wealth status of transfer sources/recipients, or the reciprocity of connections), I use both types of transfer questions.
TableS1.2 in Appendix S1 reports p-values of pairwise comparisons across the wealth classes.
Of the households identified as ultra-poor in treatment branches, 86% eventually received an asset. The other 14% either ceased to meet the eligibility criteria when transfers were implemented, or chose not to take-up the program. As such, the ITT estimates reported in the paper are close to the average treatment effect on the treated (ATT).
I also conducted a robustness check that controls for the interaction of the baseline level of the outcome, y id0 , with the survey wave fixed effects, S t=2 , in both specifications (1) and (2). The results are robust to this additional control -available from the author upon request.
Note that the point estimate of the "Treatment effect for upper class" in column 4 is large (-0.04) and border-line significant (p-value=0.109), suggesting that the program may have crowded out transfers received by upper class households from their own wealth class. In Appendix TableS2.4 I assess the differences between midline and endline treatment effects on non-ultra-poors' likelihood of receiving transfers from different wealth classes. Two findings are of note: Based on the pooled specification (Panel A1), the midline treatment effect on non-ultra-poor's likelihood to receive transfers from ultrapoor was 2ppt and significant, while this effect had increased to 3ppt by the endline (the difference is marginally significant at 10% level). This suggests that the effects are increasing over time as the ultra-poor are becoming more likely to provide transfers to the non-ultra-poor in their communities. Secondly, at midline, I find that upper class households were 6ppt less likely to receive transfers from other upper class households, but this effect had dissipated by the endline survey. This implies that in the short run, the program crowded out likelihood that upper class households receive transfers from their own wealth class.
I cannot reject the null hypotheses that the treatment effects on middle and upper classes, or on other poor and upper classes are equal (p-values are 0.448 and 0.287 respectively).
Appendix TableS2.4 presents the results of comparing midline and endline treatment effects. Overall, I do not find significant differences between the treatment effects measured at midline and endline.
In Appendix TableS2.6 I assess the differences in treatment effects on probability of having transfers from employers at endline relative to midline. None of the differences are precisely estimated and the treatment effects were similar at the two followup surveys.
Parents, children, siblings and siblings-in-law.
See, for example, Banerjee et al. (2018) for evidence from Ghana on how disentangling some of the components that are bundled together in BRAC's approach may affect the program's impact ultrapoor's socio-economic status.
Juarez (2009) finds a larger, almost one-to-one, crowding-out effect at the individual level. The data does not allow me to distinguish transfers received by different members of the same household, thus I cannot estimate the effects at the individual level.
The amount of the transfer varied across beneficiary households, depending on the number of children in the household.
Albarran and Attanasio (2003) show that the crowding-out effect was larger in villages where households' earnings were less volatile (i.e. average variance of household income is lower), which is in line with theoretical models of risk-sharing under imperfect enforcement.
Comola and Prina (2017) show that accounting for changes in network structure is important for estimating the treatment effects of development programs in rural communities.