INTRODUCTION
(c) Defining the comparison group
MEASURING IMPACT (a) Impact variables
(b) Empirical strategy
(c) Endowments and other controls
RESULTS (a) Treatment effect on the participation in NGOs
(b) Role of endowments in the participation in NGOs
(c) Sustainability
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Table 1 .
Table 2 .
Table 3 .
Table 4 .
Table 5 .
Table 6 .
Table 7 .
Table 8 .
Table 9 .
3. DATA Before launching the program in 2002, a baseline survey was conducted to collect both household and village level
) are the outcome and selection equations, respectively. P i refers to participation in NGOs, and T i refers to the treatment dummy. The outcome equation indicates that P i is a function of T i and household and village level characteristics (X i ). The selection equation captures both the selfselection of a household in the TUP program and the screening of the members by BRAC. There are also unobserved factors at the individual and household level that may potentially affect both the outcome and selection equations, thus leading to endogeneity because of nonzero correlation of the error terms, e i and l i . The most common
(3) is: E[y|T, S, A, X] = U(b 1 T + b 2 S + b 3 A + cX) where U(Á) is the standard normal cumulative distribution.The marginal effect of (say) S is given by: oU/oS = U 0 (Á)b 2 . On the other hand, the conditional mean of y in augmented Eqn. (4)is: E[y|T, S, A, X] = U(b 1 T + b 2 S + b 3 A + b 12 T Ã S + b 13 T * A + cX).The marginal effect is now given by oU/oS = U 0 (Á)(b 2 + b 12 Ã T).
Support package for the treatment group
List of assets, number and maximum value of each asset
Summary statistics of selected variables and notation of the variables used in regression
Impact of the TUP program on participation in NGOs (PSM method)
Impact of the TUP program on participation in NGOs (MB and MB-BC method) Note: The reported estimates are based on a radius of 0.25. Column 2: ATU refers to average treatment effect based on selection on unobservables. Column 3: ATT refers to average treatment effect based on selection on observables. Figures in the brackets are the 90% confidence intervals calculated by the bootstrap percentile method.
Marginal effects of probit regression-dependent variable: whether anyone has become a member of any NGO?Significant at the 1% level.HOW EFFECTIVE IS A BIG PUSH TO THE SMALL? EVIDENCE FROM A QUASI-EXPERIMENT
Marginal effects of probit regression-dependent variable: whether anyone has taken a loan from any NGO?
Marginal effects of probit regression-dependent variable: whether any NGO other than BRAC has offered membership?
Marginal effects of probit regression-dependent variable: whether any NGO including BRAC has offered membership? both recipients and nonrecipients of assets, were considered as the treatment group by BRAC (BRAC define them as selected ultra poor, SUP) and other researchers who used this data set.
Can a big push in terms of a one-off large grant to the extreme poor enable them to graduate to the microfinance program that would typically exclude them? What endowments of the extreme poor are important for their graduation to the microfinance program and can influence the effect of the big push? This paper addresses these two questions using a unique dataset from a quasi-experiment on BRAC's 1 "Challenging the Frontier of Poverty Reduction/Targeting the Ultra Poor (CFPR/TUP)" program (henceforth, TUP) in Bangladesh. It has now been recognized that the microfinance programs that were designed to alleviate poverty have failed to reach the extreme poor in Bangladesh. Microfinance institutions deliberately exclude the extreme poor, considering them to be risky clients. The extreme poor also often decide not to join because they cannot generate the alternative stream of income necessary to repay the loan installments, which start almost immediately after loan disbursement (Matin, 2005; Morduch, 1998). The TUP program provides an ideal opportunity to study whether and how the extreme poor can be accommodated into the microfinance programs.
From its long experience with the microfinance and other development programs, BRAC realized that the extreme poor would be able to break through the vicious circle of poverty only if a big push elevated them to some sort of "take-off" stage. Eventually, they will be creditworthy to participate in the microfinance program. 2 In 2002, BRAC launched the TUP program which was specifically designed to target the extreme poor. The first phase of the program was implemented during the 2002-06 period with a new cohort of participants joining the program each year. Before launching the program in a village, BRAC selected all extreme poor households therein based on several eligibility criteria (discussed in detail in Section 2(a)). The extreme poor were then given a "big push"-a large one-off grant that consisted of the transfer of income-generating assets and associated business development training and continued support over the following 18 months. The assistance included enterprise management support, a weekly subsistence allowance, health care facilities, and support for building social networks. A considerable number of the selected extreme poor did not receive assets, mainly because of their religious misperceptions and unsuccessful negotiations with the program staff on enterprise selection (discussed in detail in Section 2(c)).
One-third of the villages from the first cohort in the first phase of the TUP program were randomly selected for a baseline survey. The survey was conducted in June-July 2002 before any asset transfers. The households were revisited in September-October 2005 six months after the end of the intervention period. We use the baseline and repeat survey data, and treat as the comparison group the extreme poor who were finally selected as eligible but did not receive assets.
To address the first question, we estimate the impact on participation in the microfinance program in 2005. More specifically, we investigate whether receiving the big push had an impact on the following two outcomes: (i) whether one has joined the microfinance program of any NGO, and (ii) whether one has taken up a loan from any NGO. We also investigate two self-reported outcomes-whether one has been offered membership by any NGO-excluding and including BRAC, respectively.
The benchmark estimation strategy employed to measure the treatment effects is the Propensity Score Matching (PSM). The results suggest that the big push significantly increased the likelihood of participation in the microfinance program. The treatment members have joined and borrowed from NGOs at a significantly higher rate than the comparison members. For example, the results document that the big push has increased the likelihood of NGO membership and borrowing by about 22% and 29%, respectively. The big push has also significantly increased the likelihood of an offer for membership from both BRAC and other NGOs. However, since all treatment members received the same package, it is not possible to discern the relative contribution of the different components of the treatment.
Self-selection raises the possibility that the unobservable characteristics of some treatment members, such as entrepreneurial ability, may affect both participation in the TUP program in 2002 and graduation to the microfinance program in 2005. The standard approach to identification in the presence of unobserved heterogeneity is the instrumental variable method. In our context, the challenge is to figure out exogenous variation that affects participation in the TUP program in 2002 but does not have an independent effect on graduation to the microfinance program in 2005. We address this issue by employing the "Minimum-Bias Bias-Corrected (MB-BC)" estimator recently developed by Millimet and Tchernis (2009) that does not rely on exclusion restrictions for identification. The MB-BC estimator first estimates the Minimum Bias (MB) estimator by restricting observations to those with a propensity score in a neighborhood around the bias minimizing propensity score so as to minimize the bias. The MB-BC estimator then subtracts the bias from the MB estimator to correct the bias. The treatment effects estimated by the MB-BC method strongly support the benchmark results; however, they are much larger than the benchmark results, thus suggesting negative selection on unobservables.
To address the second question, we investigate, in addition to the role of individual and household characteristics and economic endowments, the role of two intangible attributes: (i) social capital, and (ii) awareness of social malpractices and legal injustices of which the extreme poor are victims. Previous studies have investigated the effect of participation in the microfinance program on social capital (e.g., Field, Feigenberg, & Pande, 2011), awareness (e.g., Sultana & Islam, 2009) and women empowerment (e.g., Hashemi, Schuler, & Riley, 1996). In this paper, we reverse the question to investigate the impact of the endowment of social capital and the awareness of the extreme poor on their participation in the microfinance program. 3 We estimate probit models where the dependent variables are the participation outcomes in 2005 and the explanatory variables are the pre-intervention values in 2002 of the individual and household characteristics, economic endowments, social capital, awareness, and village level fixed effects. The influence of social capital and awareness on the treatment is captured by interactions with the treatment dummy. 4 The results suggest that social capital has a significant effect on borrowing decisions, and that awareness has a significant effect on both NGO membership and borrowing decisions. Awareness also increases the likelihood of receiving an offer from an NGO. The effect of social capital on borrowing decisions can be interpreted as follows. Although it is an individual decision to join a microfinance program, borrowing and repayment are made in peer groups. Therefore, individuals endowed with higher social capital find it relatively easier to form and participate in peer groups. It has also been found that social capital amplifies the effect of the treatment on the likelihood of receiving an offer from an NGO. An NGO will invite the treatment members because of their improved economic conditions, but prefer those with higher social capital so that peer group formation, a prerequisite for loan disbursement, becomes less costly for the NGO. Awareness of social malpractices and legal injustices is associated with knowledge about individual rights in the society and also within the household. Therefore, awareness increases the confidence of women to interact outside the household so that they join and borrow from NGOs at a higher rate. They also encounter less resistance within the household for conducting business outside the household and can deftly deal with such resistance. However, we do not find evidence of awareness influencing the effect of the treatment.
Several papers have investigated the short-run impacts of the TUP program in a number of dimensions. For example, Emran, Robano, and Smith (2009) document the impact of the TUP program on income, assets, food security, and several other outcomes, but they do not find any impact on health. The Research and Evaluation Division (RED) of BRAC has also investigated similar dimensions of the impact of the TUP program. For example, Haseen and Sulaiman (2007) investigate the sustainability of food, energy, and nutrient intake of the participants 2 years after ending the program support. They find that the incremental effect on energy intake was sustained but the gain in the quality of diet faltered. However, they conclude that much of the gains and sustainability may not be due to an improved livelihood as a result of the TUP program intervention, but is due to participation in microfinance after the 2-year support cycle. Since the main intervention was the transfer of income-generating assets followed by, among others, a weekly consumption allowance for about 2 years, it is very likely that the assets, income, or consumption of the treatment rather than the comparison members will be higher in the short run. On the other hand, health or education-related outcomes require a longer period to show an impact.
It is important to mention that the second phase of the TUP program was randomized in 2007. The baseline and repeat surveys were conducted in 2007 and 2009, respectively. However, these surveys did not collect adequate information to address the research questions in this paper. For example, the information on social capital was not collected, and only partial information on our awareness index was collected. Therefore, these two indices, which are important endowments responsible for graduation of the extreme poor to the microfinance program, cannot be constructed. More importantly, in the 2009 repeat survey, not all information on our outcome variables was collected. For example, information on offer for membership by NGOs was not collected. Information on loans from NGOs was collected only for the TUP member and her husband, not for all household members. In many cases, the TUP member is older and widowed, divorced, or separated; hence other (female) adult household members borrow from NGOs. Furthermore, the randomization was done at the BRAC branch office level instead of the village level (Das & Shams, 2011). This does not entirely eliminate the problem of selection bias (Karlan & Goldberg, 2011).
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses BRAC's TUP program, including selection of the program participants and the intervention package. Section 3 describes the data, construction of social capital and awareness indices, and presents descriptive statistics of the key variables. The estimation strategy is discussed in Section 4. The results are discussed in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes.
2. THE CFPR/TUP PROGRAM BRAC started the TUP program in 2002. The first phase was implemented during the 2002-06 period with a new cohort of participants joining the program each year. The first cohort in 2002 was a pilot case for BRAC. The first phase covered 100,000 beneficiaries in 15 districts. Based on the programmatic learning and research knowledge, the second phase of the TUP program that started in 2007 incorporated diversity of intervention packages and was designed to increase the levels of outreach to 300,000 beneficiaries in 40 districts (BRAC, 2009). A brief history of the TUP program is presented in Appendix A.
(a) Selection of the "small" In the pilot phase in 2002, three northern districts-Rangpur, Kurigram, and Nilphamari-were chosen for launching the TUP program. The TUP staff in each upazila (sub-district, where a BRAC branch office is also located) had discussions with the staff of other BRAC programs which have extensive coverage in almost every corner of the upazila and years of experience working there. Based on the discussions, the TUP staff selected the villages based on the incidence of poverty.
The next stage was the selection of the participants in the selected villages. In each village, a complete household listing and their ranking based on wealth level was conducted through Participatory Wealth Ranking (PWR) exercises. 5 Households ranked as the poorest in these PWRs were considered "community defined ultra poor" because the poverty ranking was done by the community members. According to the wealth rankings, just over 25% of the households were identified as "extreme poor." A survey using a structured questionnaire was conducted to collect information on, among others, demographic characteristics, land ownership and cultivation, housing, income, assets, NGO involvement and loans, and benefits from government or other sources. This survey was conducted only among the "community defined ultra poor" in order to verify that the would-be participants fulfilled the inclusion and exclusion criteria set for participation in the TUP program.
The five inclusion criteria were that a household: (i) depended upon females working as maid servants or begging as an income source, (ii) owned no more than 10 decimals of land, (iii) lacked an economically active adult male member, (iv) had school-going children engaged in paid work, and (v) possessed no productive assets. These inclusion criteria were identified by reviewing national studies of poverty indicators. The exclusion criteria were that a household: (i) had no adult male who was able to work, (ii) participated in a microfinance program, and (iii) was a beneficiary of a government/NGO development program. Only the households meeting at least two of the inclusion criteria and none of the exclusion criteria were initially selected. 6 The final selection was made after verifying the survey information both directly and secretly in several rounds by the program staff. All the eligible extreme poor households fulfilling inclusion and exclusion criteria were selected and were invited to join the TUP program.
(b) The "big push"
The program had a 2-year cycle (the first cohort was from 2002 to 2004) and the beneficiaries received a wide range of services over 18 months from September-October 2002 to February-March 2004. The support package included the transfer of income-generating assets (such as livestock, poultry, vegetable garden and nursery, etc.), business development training, enterprise management assistance, a subsistence allowance, access to health care facilities, awareness raising training, and support for building social networks (Table 1 ). The fundamental thrust of the TUP program is enterprise development for the extreme poor. Therefore, the first step was identification of the right enterprise for a participant that would help build or broaden her economic base. A number of factors such as her prior experience, capability of enterprise management as well as the local market and environment, and social factors were considered for enterprise identification. Several rounds of discussion took place between the members in the selected household and the program staff, and an enterprise was identified after successful negotiation between the two parties. The most common enterprises were livestock and poultry rearing, while some took up vegetable or nursery growing or nonfarm enterprises. Once an enterprise was selected, the participant received a classroom orientation about the program and her enterprise. The asset was usually transferred within 1 month of the classroom training.
The average value of the asset for a participant was about Taka 6000 (approximately US$100 using the exchange rate in 2002). Although the participants had flexibility in enterprise selection, the number and value of a particular asset was predetermined by the program. For example, if a member agreed to receive cows, she would be given exactly two cows (no more, no less), for which the maximum value was Taka 8000. The program staff purchased two cows for the members in the local market. The value was determined based on the market price of two average size cows. For goats, the number was five and the maximum value was Taka 6000. Information about the purchase value of assets was not disclosed to the recipients. However, the program tried to ensure that the purchase value of an asset was very close to the maximum value attached to it. Therefore, variation in the purchased values of a particular asset among the recipients is negligible; the source of variation is the type of assets. Table 2 provides a list of assets and their maximum values. The maximum value is the combined value of the main asset and other ancillary inputs, if required for a particular enterprise. For example, in the case of vegetable gardening, BRAC first leased land on behalf of a participant and then provided her ancillary inputs such as seeds, fertilizer, pesticides, etc. in several stages. Once the assets were transferred, the participants started receiving the other inputs required to maintain the enterprise, weekly follow-up for technical advice and supervision, and a weekly subsistence allowance of Taka 70. While the input supports were provided to ensure good returns from the enterprise, subsistence allowances were aimed at reducing the initial income loss from giving up the previous livelihood.
Free health care support was provided to all members in the participant households. The BRAC-supported health volunteers in the villages, TUP program staff, and a panel doctor at the local BRAC health program were engaged in health care support. The Shasthya Shebikas (health volunteers), who are chosen from among BRAC's microfinance group members and trained by BRAC, were assigned 150 participant households each to provide preventive and curative services for common illnesses. One TUP program staff member in each branch office was also responsible for creating health awareness and practices among the participants. In cases of serious illness, members in the participant households received medical treatment from the doctor and costs were borne by the program.
Social development supports that create knowledge and awareness about their rights were also provided through regular training, so that the participants would become conscious about the vices of different social malpractices such as dowry, child marriage, and polygamy. The final key component in the package was mobilization of social support. To counteract the possibility that TUP support might crowd out informal insurance for the participants and they might become alienated from the rest of the community as a result of being a TUP program beneficiary, a forum of the local elites called Gram Daridro Bimochon Committee (Village Poverty Alleviation Committee) was formed in every intervention village. The main role of the committee was to ensure that the participants were not denied access to local services, resources and charitable efforts, that their assets were protected, and they received support and guidance in emergencies.
Because of the intensive nature of the program, the direct cost per participant was relatively high at US$434. However, the costs have been declining with program expansion. The comparable figures for the 2003 and 2004 cohorts in the first phase were US$423 and US$348, respectively (Ahmed et al., 2009).
A considerable number of selected eligible members did not receive assets for two main reasons-religious misperception and unsuccessful negotiation on enterprise selection. 7 There was a suspicion among a good number of members that the ulterior motive of BRAC behind such free asset transfer was to convert them to Christianity. Anecdotal evidence helps illustrate how pervasive the religious misperceptions were, including in the community at large. In several villages, the PWR sessions were initially resisted by the local community as they thought that BRAC, on behalf of the USA, was mapping locations for bombardment to kill the Muslim people as was happening in Afghanistan (CFPR/ TUP Research Team, 2004). This occurred even though BRAC had been working in the community for many years. This type of suspicion has grown since 9/11 and the subsequent US attacks on Afghanistan and Iraq. Some members also declined to join the program as they did not believe the NGO had benevolent intentions in regard to the transfer of free assets. They suspected that the free assets were lending in disguise and that BRAC would push for loan installments upon receipt of the asset. Free asset transfer was unprecedented in Bangladesh, so it created some initial confusion and misperceptions. It is worth mentioning that self-selection was rare in subsequent cohorts in the first phase. People learnt from experience that free asset transfer did indeed occur without any ulterior motive. Some individuals were denied assets, however, because of their poor health as they would not have been capable of operating their enterprise.
In some instances, the enterprise management skills of some eligible members did not match with the type of enterprises offered, or the quota for the particular enterprise requested had already been allotted. For example, some individuals demanded a specific enterprise but the TUP staff disagreed either about its potential profitability in the local environment or the participants' capability of managing it. If an agreement could not be reached, the TUP staff denied assets to the household. It is not possible to distinguish from the data who was denied an asset, or who declined to receive an asset or for what reasons.
Thus, the comparison group comprised the eligible households that were finally selected by the program but did not receive assets for the reasons mentioned above. 8 In our sample, there were 2376 treatment and 412 comparison households. The main woman in the household (the head of the household, or the wife of the head of the household), who received the asset, was the respondent. In addition, if each treatment member was given two fruit saplings if she owned at least some homestead land where these sapling can be planted. Those who did not own any land (usually live in other's land) were not given anything else in lieu of fruit saplings. a Each chick costs Taka 50 (36 Â Taka 50 = Taka 1800); poultry cage worth Taka 3600; costs for poultry food ranged between Taka 8000 and 12,000.
information. This was done just after selecting the program participants but before transferring them assets. From every local BRAC branch office in three districts where the program was launched, one-third of the villages were randomly selected. In each village, all treatment and comparison members were surveyed. These households were followed up in another round of survey in 2005.
(a) Measuring social capital and awareness
We define social capital, following Glaeser, Laibson, and Sacerdote (2002) and Karlan (2005), as social characteristics such as social skills and networks, which enable an individual to overcome imperfect information problems and reap market and nonmarket returns from interaction with others. 9 The following four outcome-based measures are combined to construct an index for social capital: (i) whether any invitations were received from nonrelative neighbors in the last year, (ii) whether any help was received from nonrelative neighbors in the last year, (iii) whether they had been invited to participate in shalish (a social system for informal adjudication of petty disputes by community members), and (iv) whether they had voted in the last Union Parishad (the lowest local government unit)/national election. 10 One point is assigned to each "yes" and zero to each "no." The social capital index is constructed as the sum of the points normalized by four. However, the index lacks organizational membership, an important component of social capital. This is because one of the selection criteria in the TUP program was that the participants could not be a member or a beneficiary of any NGO or government organization. This index is comparable to Guiso et al. (2004), who use two outcome-based measures of social capital-electoral participation and blood donation. A similar index has also been used by, among others, Krishna and Uphoff (1999) and Narayan and Prichett (1999). 11 An awareness index is constructed from answers to the following eight questions that test knowledge about important social malpractices and legal injustices to which the extreme poor often fall victim. The questions are (i) legal age of marriage for a boy, (ii) legal age of marriage for a girl, (iii) legal punishment for practicing dowry, (iv) legal system of divorce, (v) legal age of voting, (vi) legal punishment for rape, (vii) legal punishment for acid throwing, 12 and (viii) the power of the police to arrest someone. One point is assigned to each correct answer, and zero to each wrong answer or ignorance about the issue. The awareness index is then constructed as the sum of the points normalized by the number of questions.
(b) Descriptive statistics The summary statistics of the endowments for the treatment and comparison members in 2002, such as demographic characteristics, economic conditions, social capital, and awareness, and their participation in NGOs in 2005, are reported in Table 3 .
It is evident that there are no significant differences between the two groups in several of the characteristics such as the average education level in the household, land ownership, the number of household members employed in the lean season, indices of social capital and awareness, and females going outside their home alone. On the other hand, the two groups differ in several other respects. For example, the treatment group has a slightly larger household size, and more members engaged in income-generating activities. The education level of the head of the household, the percentage of self-employed household heads, per capita income, and the average value of the dwelling house (which is based on the value of construction materials) are slightly higher for the comparison group. Absolute values of these endowments are small enough to rule out higher opportunity costs of graduating to the microfinance program for one group over another. For example, household heads of the treatment and comparison members had only 0.33 and 0.49 years of schooling, respectively. This also applies to other endowments such as income and value of the dwelling house. It is worth mentioning that both groups were excluded from the microfinance program until 2002 because of their extreme poverty.
In 2005, about 41% of the treatment members had joined an NGO, and 40% had taken a loan. The comparable figures for the comparison members are 13% and 9%, respectively. About 60% of the treatment members reported receiving an offer from an NGO, and 39% had received an offer from an NGO excluding BRAC. The comparable figures for the comparison members are 12% and 8%, respectively.
The main objective of the TUP program is that the participants will sustain the benefits of the asset transfer and other supports and will, consequently, break through the barriers of extreme poverty. As a result, they will be creditworthy to join the microfinance program. Participation to the microfinance program is also arguably informative about the longrun impact of the TUP program. The reason is that NGOs in Bangladesh exclude the extreme poor because of their lack of creditworthiness but include those who are able to generate an alternative flow of income to repay the loan. The creditworthiness of the TUP graduates is an indication of a sustained impact from the NGOs' point of view. The purpose for borrowing is not important for our investigation.
We capture graduation by the following two variables: (i) whether one has become a member of any NGO, and (ii) whether one has taken a loan from any NGO. The reason for the first outcome is that many NGOs in Bangladesh do not immediately offer loans to their members. There are also some NGO members who join only to make precautionary savings on a regular basis. Most microfinance programs in Bangladesh also require their members to make compulsory weekly or bi-weekly savings. There are also some NGOs that do not allow their members to withdraw savings without discontinuing membership.
A TUP graduate will become an NGO member or borrow from an NGO if both demand and supply conditions are satisfied. She will demand a loan only if she perceives that the treatment has generated or enhanced her entrepreneurial ability, so that she is able to make a productive investment, and/or the treatment has improved her economic condition sufficiently so that she is now able to generate a stream of alternative income to repay the loan installments. An NGO will provide a loan based on the same criteria, in addition to its organizational criteria for member selection such as the cutoff level of land ownership (for most NGOs in Bangladesh the cut-off is 50 decimals of land). An NGO may also consider the social capital of the potential member which is vital for peer group formation. Therefore, NGO membership or borrowing is the equilibrium outcome of the demand for and supply of a loan.
We also investigate two additional outcomes-if one has been offered membership by any NGO-excluding and includ-ing BRAC, respectively. The reason is that there may be TUP graduates who do not demand a loan although the NGOs are willing to supply as they are considered as creditworthy. There is another possibility that some TUP graduates applied for membership or a loan but their applications were denied. We do not have information about unsuccessful applications.
The benchmark estimation method for the treatment effect is the Propensity Score Matching (PSM). The PSM is based on the identifying assumption that the outcomes are equal in expectation conditional on controls in the absence of the treatment. The controls are chosen based on two criteria-the TUP selection process and the participation decision at the household level. They are intended to account for labor endowment, physical and human capital at the household level, and economic and marketing opportunity at the village level. Based on the discussion in Section 2(a), these are age, gender, education, marital status, employment (self vs. wage) and the health status of the household head, family size, number of household members engaged in income-generating activities, amount of land owned, per capita income, and value of the dwelling house (excluding land). We construct an index for the village level infrastructure or economic vibrancy. Profitability of an enterprise depends on economic vibrancy and so does the likelihood of participation in the microfinance program. The following village level variables are used to construct the vibrancy score: distances from upazila, nearest bank, bazaar, bus stand, high school, and all-weather road, number of shops, and the percentage of households with an electricity connection. Since higher distances indicate poor infrastructure, reciprocals of the relevant variables were first calculated and then principal component analysis was used to construct a score. We also control for religion dummy (1 = Muslim, 0 = otherwise) since religious misperception was one of the reasons for not accepting TUP assets. All controls are 2002 baseline values.
However, the PSM is based on the Conditional Independence Assumption (CIA) that there is no selection on unobservables, which may not hold in our case. Therefore, we also estimate the treatment effect by the "Minimum-Bias Bias-Corrected" (MB-BC) method recently developed by Millimet and Tchernis (2009) that does not rely on exclusion restrictions for identification. In the following, we provide a brief intuitive explanation of the MB-BC approach (for detail and technical discussions, see Millimet & Tchernis, 2009). Suppose, we have the following triangular model:
where (1) and ( 2 unobserved heterogeneity in our context is likely to be entrepreneurial ability at the individual level. There may also be village level unobserved factors, such as level of infrastructure development. BRAC may place the TUP program in a village connected by better infrastructure to minimize the operating costs, but there are likely to be more microfinance borrowers in such a village because of better production and marketing opportunities (Mallick & Nabin, 2011).
If the CIA holds, the outcome equation can be estimated by several matching methods in the absence of exclusion restrictions (Heckman & Navarro-Lozano, 2004; Hirano & Imbens, 2001). The MB-BC method estimates the bias-corrected treatment effect when the CIA assumption fails but one lacks a valid exclusion restriction. The MB-BC estimator first estimates the Minimum Bias (MB) estimator by restricting observations to those with a propensity score in a neighborhood around the bias minimizing propensity score to minimize the bias. The MB-BC estimator then subtracts the bias from the MB estimator to correct the bias. We report both the MB and MB-BC estimators to understand the direction of bias due to selection on unobservables. In our estimation, the controls for nearest neighbor matching are the same variables as those previously included in the PSM. Note that the treatment effects estimated by the PSM and MB-BC are not comparable.
To investigate the role of the endowments, we estimate the following specification:
where y i is the participation outcome in 2005, and S i , A i , and X i are the social capital index, the awareness index, and a vector of controls in 2002 defined in next section, respectively. The reason for this cross-sectional specification is our interest in the role of individual and household level endowments in influencing the outcomes. Equation ( 3 ) is estimated by the probit model and we report the marginal effects. We emphasize the marginal effect of the intangible attributes-social capital and awareness. The marginal effect of social capital (awareness) refers to, after controlling for the effects of the treatment and other factors, the change in the likelihood of participation in the microfinance program for one unit increase in social capital (awareness). It is expected that the marginal effect of social capital (awareness) will be positive and significant.
To understand whether intangible attributes influence the effect of the treatment, we augment Eqn. (3) by the interaction of social capital and awareness with the treatment dummy:
In Eqn. (4), a significantly positive (negative) magnitude of the interaction term implies that social capital (awareness) raises (lowers) the effect of the treatment on the outcome. In other words, a treatment member will be more likely to graduate to the microfinance program if she is endowed with higher social capital (awareness). The explanation of the marginal effect of social capital (awareness) under augmentation deserves attention. If the marginal effect of social capital (awareness) continues to be positive and significant, assuming that the effect of the interaction term is also positive and significant, then it can be inferred that social capital (awareness) increases the likelihood of graduation to the microfinance program and also amplifies the effect of the treatment. In other words, it directly affects the impact variable and also indirectly through the treatment. Contrarily, if the marginal effect turns out to be insignificant, then it can be inferred that social capital (awareness) impacts only through the treatment. 13
The indices for the endowment of social capital and awareness are discussed in Section 3(a). The variables in the X i vector in Eqns. (3) and ( 4 ) are chosen based on the selection criteria of the TUP program and participants' characteristics influencing their decision to join the TUP program. These variables also enter in the PSM and have been discussed in previous section. In addition, we include two proxies for women empowerment as it is correlated with social capital and awareness: (i) the percentage of major household items purchased by females in the last year; and (ii) the number of females going out alone for purposes other than visiting neighbors and relatives in the last 3 months.
As mentioned in Section 2(b), the source of variations in asset values among the treatment members is the types of asset they received. Dummies for different asset types are included to account for such variation. Assets are classified in five broad categories: (i) poultry, (ii) livestock, (iii) agricultural production (such as vegetable gardening and nursery), (iv) small business (such as a grocery shop), and (v) others (such as rickshaw/van, sewing machine), of which four are included in regressions, with poultry as the base category. The highest percentage of the treatment members in the sample received livestock (0.537), followed by poultry (0.274) and small business (0.13), while a negligible percentage received vegetable gardening and nursery (0.053), and other assets (0.006).
We also control for the health status of the respondents for the following reasons. Ailing persons are less capable of operating an enterprise or engaging in economic activities, which, in turn, negatively affects their participation in the TUP program. The respondents defined their health status in one of the following four scales: (i) very good, (ii) good, (iii) neither good nor bad, and (iv) bad. Three dummies are included in the regression with "very good" as the base category.
To account for any externality from the treatment group to the comparison group members, we control for the percentage of eligible extreme poor in the village receiving the assets (i.e., the ratio of the number of the treatment members to both the treatment and comparison members). Since both the treatment and comparison members live in the same village, their interactions may influence the behavior of the comparison members, including their participation decision. We recognize that inclusion of this variable may undermine the general equilibrium effect of the program. Nonetheless, we control for it in order to separate out the difference in the outcomes between the treatment and comparison groups. 14 It is important to mention that village level physical infrastructure also captures externality to a large extent because it is easier for individuals to interact in a village with better infrastructure.
We now turn to the results for the treatment effects on the participation outcomes. We first present the results estimated by the PSM method. We impose the common support region of [0.542, 0.969], which is based on a visual inspection of the density distribution of the propensity score in both groups. This retains 2544 of the 2595 observations. Estimates are
174 WORLD DEVELOPMENT
) If anyone has become NGO member? 0.193 *** (18.27) 0.223 *** (5.79) C = 1.00 5.68 (0.000); 5.68 (0.000) 4.26 (0.000); 4.26 (0.000) C = 1.10 5.05 (0.000); 6.32 (0.000) 3.80 (0.000); 4.74 (0.000) C = 1.30 3.97 (0.000); 7.47 (0.000) 2.99 (0.001); 5.57 (0.000) C = 1.50 3.05 (0.001); 8.48 (0.000) 2.31 (0.010); 6.29 (0.000) C = 2.00 1.26 (0.103); 10.62 (0.000) 0.94 (0.173); 7.79 (0.000) If anyone has taken NGO loan? 0.255 *** (24.51) 0.290 *** (8.82) C = 1.00 7.61 (0.000); 7.61 (0.000) 5.74 (0.000); 5.74 (0.000) C = 1.10 7.02 (0.000); 8.22 (0.000) 5.30 (0.000); 6.19 (0.000) C = 1.30 6.01 (0.000); 9.32 (0.000) 4.54 (0.000); 6.99 (0.000) C = 1.50 5.17 (0.000); 10.30 (0.000) 3.90 (0.000); 7.69 (0.000) C = 2.00 3.54 (0.000); 12.40 (0.000) 2.63 (0.000); 9.16 (0.000) If any NGO other than BRAC has offered membership? 0.264 *** (25.41) 0.298 *** (9.27) C = 1.00 7.89 (0.000); 7.89 (0.000) 6.99 (0.000); 6.99 (0.000) C = 1.10 7.30 (0.000); 8.49 (0.000) 6.55 (0.000); 7.46 (0.000) C = 1.30 6.31 (0.000); 9.58 (0.000) 5.77 (0.000); 8.28 (0.000) C = 1.50 5.48 (0.000); 10.55 (0.000) 5.11 (0.000); 9.00 (0.000) C = 2.00 3.88 (0.000); 12.63 (0.000) 3.83 (0.000); 10.51 (0.000) If any NGO including BRAC has offered membership? 0.409 *** (39.24) 0.456 *** (12.33) C = 1.00 12.01 (0.000); 12.01 (0.000) 9.46 (0.000); 9.46 (0.000) C = 1.10 11.26 (0.000); 12.77 (0.000) 8.97 (0.000); 9.97 (0.000) C = 1.30 10.00 (0.000); 14.17 (0.000) 8.12 (0.000); 10.86 (0.000) C = 1.50 8.96 (0.000); 15.43 (0.000) 7.40 (0.000); 11.64 (0.000) C = 2.00 6.97 (0.000); 18.15 (0.000) 5.98 (0.000); 13.27 (0.000) Figures in parentheses are t-statistics. Column 2: Average treatment effect on the treated using radius (0.01) matching. Column 4: Average treatment effect on the treated using kernel (Gaussian) matching. C = Odds of differential assignment due to unobservables. *** Significant at the 1% level. HOW EFFECTIVE IS A BIG PUSH TO THE SMALL? EVIDENCE FROM A QUASI-EXPERIMENT based on both radius and kernel matching for checking robustness.
The results for the average treatment effect on the treated (ATT) are reported in Table 4 . Columns 2 and 4 report the ATTs using radius (a value of 0.01) and kernel (Gaussian) matching, respectively. For all outcomes, the treatment effects are positive and significant at any conventional level. The estimated coefficient using radius matching is 0.193 for NGO membership and 0.25 for borrowing from any NGO. The coefficient is the largest at 0.41 for offers from any NGO including BRAC. This can be explained by the fact that since BRAC implemented the TUP program, it possessed more information than other NGOs about the participants' improved economic conditions and, therefore, made more offers. 15 The treatment effects estimated by kernel matching, although slightly larger, do not meaningfully differ from those estimated by radius matching; for example, the treatment effect for NGO membership and borrowing increases to 0.22 and 0.29, respectively.
We also perform sensitivity analysis of the treatment effects obtained by the PSM. Given that all outcome variables are binary, we report the Mantel-Haenszel Q þ mh ðQ À mh Þ statistic under the assumption of overestimation (underestimation) of the treatment effect, and the associated p-values, p þ mh ðp À mh Þ (Aakvik, 2001; Becker & Caliendo, 2007). Our main interest is in Q þ mh (and p þ mh ) as it tests whether the treatment effect is biased upward because of positive selection on unobservables. The test results, presented in columns 3 and 5 for the two matching methods, respectively, show that the estimated treatment effects on all impact measures are robust to allowing for a considerable level of selection on unobservables. The p þ mh values for different level of selections (Gamma ranging from 1 to 2) are always zero suggesting that the treatment effect is insensitive to bias that would double the odds of belonging to different groups due to unobservables.
However, the treatment effects estimated by the PSM will be biased if some unobservable factors affect both the decision to join the TUP program in 2002 and participation in the microfinance program in 2005. Now we discuss the results for the MB-BC estimator that corrects the bias. But first we present the results for bias minimizing MB estimator using a radius of 0.25 in panel A in Table 5 . 16 The treatment effects are close to those obtained by the PSM although slightly larger. The MB-BC results are reported in panel B. The results show the average treatment effect for joining and borrowing from NGOs, and also offers for NGO membership including BRAC are much larger (more than double) than those estimated by the PSM and MB. The average treatment effects are lower when selection is on observables (column 3) rather than unobservables (column 2) but they are still much larger than those obtained by the PSM and MB. In both columns, the 90% confidence intervals are generated by bootstrapping with 250 replications. The confidence intervals do not contain zero, thus providing strong evidence that the TUP program intervention has a significant effect on graduation to the microfinance program. The larger values of the MB-BC estimates suggest a negative selection on unobservables. When the effect on offers for NGO membership excluding BRAC is estimated, the average treatment effect is lower than those estimated by the PSM, and the lower bound of the 90% confidence intervals is marginally negative, thus not strongly supporting the benchmark results. 17 The endogeneity-bias-corrected results support the benchmark results, and the conclusion that the TUP program intervention has had a strong positive impact on graduation to the microfinance program.
In this section, we present the results for Eqns. (3) and ( 4 ), both estimated by the probit model to address the second question about the role of the endowments.
The results for NGO membership are presented in Table 6 . Column 2 presents the results for Eqn. (3), and columns 3-5 present the same for Eqn. (4). The marginal effect of awareness is significant in all specifications, but the magnitude of its interaction with the treatment dummy is insignificant. A unit increase in awareness increases the likelihood of joining an NGO by about 0.12 percentage points. On the other hand, both the marginal effect of social capital and its interaction with the treatment dummy are insignificant. Members in the households with male rather than female heads have about 10% higher likelihood of joining an NGO. The likelihood is also higher for individuals living in larger families. The likelihood increases with the average education level in the household and per capita income, but it decreases with the education level of the household head.
The results for the next outcome variable, whether one has taken a loan from any NGO, are presented in Table 7 . Both social capital and awareness are significant in predicting the borrowing decision. Their marginal effects are almost the same, at around 0.10, but neither of the interaction effects is significant. The same endowments that explain NGO membership also explain borrowing decisions (except per capita income, which is now significant). In addition, self-employment of the household head increases the likelihood of borrowing from NGOs. The latter variable can also be considered as a proxy for entrepreneurship, because self-employed remuneration is uncertain, which differentiates it from employed work (Blanchflower, 2000; OECD, 1998). However, it may also be the case that in the informal sector in developing countries, workers engaged in low-skill, small-scale, subsistence activities become entrepreneurs to avoid unemployment (Chaudhuri, Schneider, & Chattopadhyay, 2006). Table 8 presents the results for offers from NGOs, excluding BRAC. The marginal effect of social capital is significant only if it is not interacted with the treatment dummy. On the other hand, the marginal effect of awareness is significant in all combinations of the interactions. The magnitude of interaction of the treatment dummy with social capital ranges from 0.35 to 0.38, and is significant (at 5% level), but the same interaction with awareness is insignificant. These magnitudes should not be taken literally since social capital and awareness are constructed indices. The results suggest that awareness increases the likelihood of receiving an offer from NGOs but does not magnify the effect of the treatment. On the other hand, mere endowment of social capital does not increase the likelihood of receiving an offer but it amplifies the effect of the treatment. The only other individual or household characteristics found to be significant is the average education level in the household. The village level infrastructure is also positive and robustly significant. When offers from NGOs, including BRAC, are investigated (Table 9 ), both awareness and social capital enter significantly with their marginal effects being about 0.12 and 0.14, respectively. But both their interactions enter insignificantly, implying that neither of them amplifies the effect of the treatment.
The overall results suggest the importance of the endowments of social capital and awareness in the likelihood of participation in NGOs. More specifically, social capital has a significant effect on borrowing decisions. Borrowing and repayment in the microfinance program are done in peer groups so that individuals endowed with higher social capital find it relatively easier to form and perform in a peer group. It has also been found that social capital amplifies the effect in the treatment group of the likelihood of offers by NGOs.
From the NGO point of view, it will invite a treatment member who has higher social capital so that peer group formation, which is a prerequisite for loan disbursement, becomes less costly for the NGO. Karlan (2005) finds, in the case of group lending program of FINCA-Peru, that individuals with stronger social connections in the peer group have higher repayment and saving rates.
Awareness has a significant effect on both NGO membership and borrowing decisions. Awareness, which is associated with knowledge about individual rights both in the society and within the household, makes women confident to interact outside the household. Therefore, they join and borrow from NGOs at a higher rate. They also encounter less resistance in the household to do business outside and can deftly deal with such resistance.
The average education level in the household has been found to be important for all participation outcomes, suggest-ing the importance of the human capital externality within the household. The result that male-headed households have a higher likelihood of borrowing can be interpreted as follows.
Although loans are made to females, they are usually utilized and controlled by male adults in the households (Husain et al., 1998).
It is yet to be known how many of these members or borrowers will continue in the future. However, this question is equally valid for the impact of the microfinance program in general. There is always some discontinuation or dropout in the microfinance program, mainly because of the failure to gain any benefit or to sustain the initial benefit. If the objective of the TUP program is to get the treatment members out of extreme poverty so that NGOs no longer exclude them from the microfinance program, then the effect of the big push is commendable. Given that the extreme poor are not creditworthy from NGOs' point of view, and that they often self-select not to participate because of extreme poverty, the observed level of participation and membership offers from NGOs after the big push are good indications of sustainable improvements in the poverty situation. NGOs will only offer membership if they perceive that a treatment member has improved her poverty situation on a sustained basis. The extreme poor will participate if they are able to generate the alternative stream of income necessary to repay the loan installments. The impact of the big push is, therefore, nontrivial-shortly after the end of the intervention period about 60% of the extreme poor had received offers, and 40% had already borrowed from NGOs. Conversely, if the objective of the TUP program is to alleviate poverty that the microfinance program has arguably failed to do so far, then several follow-ups in the future will be required.
This paper investigates whether a "big push" to the extreme poor in terms of a one-off asset transfer can get them out of extreme poverty to enable them to participate in the microfinance program that typically excludes them. We use data from a quasi-experiment in the first phase of BRAC's TUP program. The selected extreme poor were transferred income-gen-erating assets and provided continued supports over the following 18 months that included enterprise management assistance, a subsistence allowance, health care facilities, and support for building social networks. Some of the extreme poor who did not receive assets were treated as the comparison group.
We find that a big push has indeed enabled the extreme poor to participate in the microfinance program. The results are robust to correction for endogeneity that results from unobserved heterogeneity among the treatment and comparison members. Social capital has a significant effect on borrowing decisions. Awareness has a significant effect on both NGO membership and borrowing decisions.
The TUP program is costly in terms of the value of the assets transferred, the complementary supports and the intensive nature of the involvement of the program staff. Although the costs have been decreasing with the program's expansion, the intervention continues to rely on donor support. Nonetheless, this type of intervention can be considered to be useful, since the only known alternative is to create a safety net for the poor that has not been proven to break through the barriers of extreme poverty. 2. The impact of microfinance on poverty alleviation is still unclear due mainly to the methodological problems in impact assessment (Armenda ´riz & Morduch, 2005). Banerjee, Duflo, Glennerster, and Kinnan (2010) recently conducted a randomized control experiment that overcomes these problems. They do not find any impact on health, education, or women decision-making in the short run. However, expenditure on durable goods increases and the number of new businesses increases by one third in treated areas.
3. Karlan (2007) has studied the effect of social capital on the performance in the microfinance program in terms of loan repayment, saving behavior, and member retention rate. Ameen and Sulaiman (2006) have studied the effect of social capital on consumption expenditure of the extreme poor in Bangladesh.
4. The two questions are interrelated and also very important from programmatic point of view because impact of any intervention depends on its design and characteristics of the target group.
5. For a detailed discussion on the PWR method and how households were selected, please see CFPR/ TUP Research Team (2004).
6. The TUP program still follows the same selection criteria.
7. The following account is based on the author's discussions with the TUP staff at the branch offices who were directly involved in implementing the program during 2002-04.
8. An innovation in this paper is the selection of the comparison group. In fact, all households initially selected by the PWRs (i.e., "community defined ultra poor") were surveyed in both rounds. The households finally selected after fulfilling the inclusion and exclusion Those who were initially selected by the PWRs, but dropped out later because they failed to meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria, were considered as the comparison group (nonselected ultra poor, NSUP). In our sample, we discard the NSUP altogether. However, it is important to mention that by defining the treatment as SUP, these papers estimate the intention-to-treat parameter, whereas the parameter estimated in this paper yields the treatment effect conditional on accepting the asset.
The two estimators answer different policy questions. I thank one referee for mentioning this point.
9. There is a considerable amount of ambiguity and confusion as to what social capital means. For a detailed review on social capital, see Durlauf and Fafchamps (2006), and Sobel (2002).
10. Voting is also a social event, especially for the rural women in Bangladesh, when they get an opportunity to go out of their home and interact with others.
11. Dowla (2006) describes that participation in Grameen Bank credit program builds social capital among its members. The author discusses social capital in terms of norms, trust and networks.
12. Acid throwing, which is a form of violent assault, is common in Bangladesh. Perpetrators of these attacks throw acid at the victims (usually at their faces), burning them, and damaging skin tissue, often exposing and sometimes dissolving the bones. The consequences of these attacks include blindness and permanent scarring of the face and body. These attacks have been used as a form of revenge for refusal of sexual advances, proposals of marriage and demands for dowry ( http://en.wiki- pedia.org/wiki/Acid_throwing ).
13. The calculation of the marginal effect in the presence of interaction terms is the following. Suppose the conditional mean of y (for simplicity, ignore the subscripts) in Eqn. Similarly, the formula for the marginal effect of other variables that are interacted (T or A) changes accordingly, but the formula for the variables that are not interacted is the same as before. The magnitude of the interaction e ff e c t ( s a y b e t w e e n T a n d S ) i s g i v e n b y :
Standard errors of the marginal effects can be calculated by the "delta method." For a binary variable, such as T, the marginal effect is given by: oU/oT = Prob[y|T = 1; S, A, X] À Prob[y|T = 0; S, A, X]. For a discussion on marginal and interaction e ff e c t s i n p r o b i t m o d e l , s e e A i a n d N o r t o n ( 2 0 0 3 ) .
14. The results presented in the next section are robust to exclusion of this variable.
15. There is a possibility that BRAC persuaded or pushed the TUP members to join its microfinance program to demonstrate the success of the TUP program to the donors, even though the participants were not ready or willing to graduate. Author's informal discussions with the BRAC staff who implemented the TUP program at the field level reveal that there was no such pressure on them. There are no restrictions on the TUP members joining other NGOs.
16. The Monte Carlo simulations by Millimet and Tchernis (2009) show that the MB-BC estimator with a large radius performs well in correcting the bias from selection on unobservables. We also estimate the MB-BC estimator using alternative radius and the results are fairly robust (not reported).
17. All NGOs in Bangladesh offer very similar loan packages so that the clients are indifferent among NGOs. The TUP graduates will, therefore, prefer BRAC over other NGOs because of their bonding relationship developed during the TUP intervention period. BRAC loan officers are also familiar to them. Other NGOs will be reluctant to offer the TUP graduates membership and loans for the same reasons.
*
Note: First the null hypothesis of the equality of the variance was tested. Based on rejection or nonrejection of the null, the equality of the mean was tested. Figures in parentheses are standard deviations. * p-value of the Pearson Chi-square statistics.
* Significant at the 10% level. ** Significant at the 5% level. ***
* Significant at the 10% level. ** Significant at the 5% level. *
** Significant at the 5% level. *** Significant at the 1% level.
* Significant at the 10% level. ** Significant at the 5% level. *** Significant at the 1% level.
WORLD DEVELOPMENT